Catherine: Hello.

Howard: Good morning.

Catherine: Please could you just tell us who you are and tell us
where we are here today please?

Howard: Yes. My name is Howard Slater and we’re in a boatyard
down in Plymouth which is in the county of Devon in the South
West of England. Plymouth is a historically very important
city, a lot of Royal Navy connections. And today we’re sitting
in an amphibious vehicle which has its home in Plymouth.

Catherine: That’s lovely. Could you explain a little bit about
this vehicle that we’re sitting on? You said it was an
amphibious vehicle. What does that mean?

Howard: Right, well, an amphibious vehicle is a machine which is
both boat and road vehicle so in this particular instance it’s
actually a machine which was based on a original 2 and a half
tonne truck around which they fitted a hull, and then a
propeller and some way of controlling it in the water. So you
can drive it on the road as if it was an ordinary fairly large
lorry, a little bit the sort of size of a sprinter bus, for
example, and then you can drive it to a slipway and drive
straight down into the water. You switch the wheels off and you
turn the propeller on and then it behaves as if it was exactly
like a boat, a little bit slow but nevertheless it’s still a
boat working on the water. And then you can reverse the
process. You can come back and you can approach the slipway
from the water and you can come out of the water and turn it
back into a bus.

Catherine: So what are these vehicles used for then down here?

Howard: Well, they’re used — these vehicles are now used
primarily for carrying tourists. There’s a great attraction as
far as tourists are concerned because it’s such an unusual
vehicle and they get a thrill from really the splash into the
water. But they can be used for any other sort of purpose. The
machines that you’re — this machine that you’re sitting in is
configured so that there’re two crew – a driver and a crewman
to help him – and there’s seating for 28 passengers in this
vessel.

Catherine: So as well as Plymouth, do these operate anywhere
else in the UK?

Howard: Yes, there are several places. They can be found in
Liverpool, in London, in Belfast, there are one or two private
ones operating off the coast at Hunstanton in Norfolk and down
at St Michael’s Mount in Devon, for example. Or is it Cornwall?
I think it’s actually down in Cornwall. And round the world
there are many places where these machines are operating,
primarily as tour vehicles, although there are other
possibilities of using them for civil defence, for using them
as ambulances, for example, there’s a developing need for that.
In third world countries, using them for dealing with floods is
an increasing possible use.

Catherine: Are these — Is this a brand new design?

Howard: Well, the history of this particular machine is that it
is based on a design of a — an amphibious vehicle which was
built by the Americans in order to help the invasion of Europe
during World War 2 and they became known as ‘Ducks’ because the
military acronym for these is DUKW which was just fortuitously
given to them but it turned out to be ‘Duck’ and it’s obviously
very, very appropriate. So their initial design and building was
to turn a General Motors 2 and a half tonne truck into a machine
which helped to land men and materials onto the beaches on
D-Day. So it took it from the boats that brought them across
the Channel and then it trans — was used to transfer men and
materials onto the beaches. Now, this machine is an evolution
of that form of machine. And it’s got a lot of modern features
to it and this particular machine is actually a prototype for
the next incarnation of these machines.

Catherine: Could you tell us a little bit about what those new
features are? What kind of things are new about this machine?

Howard: Yes. The first and most important thing is that the
engine has been changed from a petrol engine to a diesel engine
and has been made much more powerful. On this particular machine
also, we have replaced the propeller system with a modern jet
drive which provides both the steering and also the power when
it’s on the water. The drive of the wheels is still very much
the same system as the original machines but it is — they have
been modernised in particular ways, in detailed engineering
ways. And then there’s a lot of new electronics in it and that
sort of thing. So that’s what this particular prototype has
done. For the future, if you’d like me to talk a little bit
about that, we have taken it even further and that the hull and
the superstructure, instead of being made of metal, is now made
of a modern composite glass-reinforced plastic, known as GRP
for short. And GRP is much lighter, it’s very much stronger
than metal and it’s got a lot of nice properties. And the other
major final change that’s been put into the latest incarnation,
the latest design, is to replace the prop-drive system with
hydraulic drives and that makes the machines very much more
safe than the original machines.

Catherine: I’d imagine that as it carries passengers, there are
quite a few safety regulations that you’d have to conform with?

Howard: Yes.

Catherine: That p’raps didn’t exist when these vehicles were
originally built.

Howard: No, there were no regulations when they were used for
military purposes. As long as they stayed afloat on the water
and went up the beaches, although by saying that they could go
up a sand dune with a 1 in 2 they were so powerful. But there
were obviously no safety standards, no health and safety, no
risk analyses were done, and so forth. So in order to use them
commercially for carrying fare-paying passengers, we have to
comply with 2 sets of regulations. The first is bus regulations
so it has to comply with all the safety features, it has to have
emergency exits, the engine has to have a cut off point, and all
sorts of things of that sort. And then on the water, it has to
be registered with the Maritime and Coastguard Agency to carry
passengers and again there are a range of safety implications.
For the former, you get issued with what’s called a Certificate
of Initial Fitness, which means that it complies with the bus
regulations that are necessary for this size of machine. And as
far as the water is concerned, you get what’s called a Passenger
Certification. And both those certificates have to be annually
checked to make sure that there have been no changes to the
machine, that it hasn’t started to rust in places that it
shouldn’t rust, and so on.

Catherine: OK. So as well as considering safety features, I’d
imagine that there are some quite strict environmental concerns
that you need to think about now as well?

Howard: Yes, these days environmental considerations for all
sorts of forms of transport are obviously a priority, primarily
from the point of view of what pollutants that the engines push
into the atmosphere through the exhaust gases. So the engines
have to comply with various standards. In Europe, these are
known as Euro Standards for the type of engine that you use and
so on. This deals with things like the amount of CO2, nitrogen,
sulphic compounds and the question of particulate material’ll
come. So yes, we comply with the latest standards in engine
cleanliness and we use clean engines from that point of view.

Catherine: So as well as carrying tourists, can you see any
other possibilities for these vehicles? You mentioned earlier
about civil defence and possibly ambulances. Are you exploring
any other uses for these vehicles?

Howard: Yes. I mean, those are the 2 main areas of dealing with
particularly flood situations where you get floods that prevent
fire engines, for example, in getting through in order to take
equipment through to an electrical substation, for example. One
of these machines would be able to go both on the road and where
necessary, if the water were high enough, it would be able to go
and deal with the flood side of it. And because they’re such
sturdy machines, they’ll be able to take in a lot of equipment,
pumping equipment for example. Rescuing people. It’s been said
for example that if the Council on Morecambe Sands had had one
of these machines when the cockle pickers were caught a few
years ago, it would have been able to go out into the racing-in
tide and to be able to rescue those people. Various situations
of that sort will be used and people are beginning to explore
those possibilities. For third world countries, they’re looking
at them in terms of vehicles which can be used to help cross
rivers where there aren’t standard bridges and where there
aren’t ferries across, and so on and there are those sorts of
implications. Again, in a third world situation, they’re looking
at them as very robust types of ambulances that can go across
both water and road and take people to hospital. So those are
the kinds of situations. Another one that’s being explored too
is to use them for environmental survey work, where you’re
trying to do work assessing what the bottom quality of the
river is, for example, looking at the geological and the
hydro-geological status of a particular environment. So there
are possibilities all round. They could be good work boats for
that kind of activity.

Catherine: As well as pleasure boats?

Howard: As well as pleasure boats, yes.

Catherine: And finally I was just thinking about operations
around the world. Are you the only company manufacturing these
vehicles at the moment?

Howard: We’re the only people manufacturing this particular
design of machine. There are other people who have designed and
built other types of amphibious vehicles. But I think the real
key to this particular machine is the fact that everybody knows
about the DUKWs, the ‘ducks’ that fought in the war. And there’s
an iconic status to them which we’re really trading on in terms
of the tourist side of it. People recognise it and they want to
go on it. As far as I’m aware, there’s nowhere else in the world
where anybody’s manufacturing modern versions of these machines.

Catherine: That’s lovely. Thank you very much.

Howard: My pleasure.
