Catherine: Hello.

Sam: Hi.

Catherine: Could you introduce yourself please and tell us a
little bit about what you do here?

Sam: Yes. My name is Sam and I run an amphibious tour operation
in Plymouth. It’s called ‘Ducks ‘n’ Drake’.

Catherine: Right.

Sam: And, yeah , we run around Plymouth picking up in the centre
of town and taking people out onto the water so they get an
all-encompassing view of Plymouth as a whole.

Catherine: What do you mean by ‘amphibious tour’?

Sam: It’s a tour on water and on land with specialist vehicles.

Catherine: Right, OK. And you said this goes round in Plymouth.
Could you say a little bit about where Plymouth is, please?

Sam: Plymouth is located on the south coast of England. It is
the south-west, it’s in Devon. It’s a mile away from Cornwall.
It’s located on a Y shape of two rivers, the Tamar and the
Plym, with Plymouth Sound which is — within which is Devonport
which is Europe’s largest naval base. There’s a phenomenal
amount of history here, mostly naval history because of it
being Europe’s largest naval base. In fact that’s why we called
our tour ‘Ducks ‘n’ Drake.

Catherine: And what’s the significance of that?

Sam: Sir Francis Drake was based here.

Catherine: Right, OK.

Sam: He led his — He was playing bowls up on the Ho when he saw
the invasion and led his ships out to fight them.

Catherine: OK. And what’s the importance of the ‘ducks’, then,
in the name?

Sam: The ‘ducks’ are the specialist vehicles we use, are based
on World War 2 amphibious vehicles called DUKWs, an American
machine which have become known as ‘Ducks’ because obviously
‘DUKW’ sounds like ‘Duck’ and they’re amphibious.

Catherine: OK.

Sam: Hence the ‘Ducks’ in ‘Ducks ‘n’ Drake’.

Catherine: And why do you think this kind of tour is
particularly unique or special?

Sam: Well, you’re not gonna be able to get on a coach and then
end up in the water, cos if you do you’ll sink. The tour is
unique insomuch that you cover land and water. Also, you’re on
a bright yellow machine so people are gonna see you and it’s a
lot of fun. Rather than being a — just a guided tour, it’s —
you know, it’s a lot of fun, we have a laugh and we joke around
when we’re on the machines.

Catherine: OK. Where does the tour go in Plymouth?

Sam: Right, it picks up in the centre of town, in one of the
central car parks where we’ve got our ticket booth and our
pick-up point. We then cruise round the centre of town and down
through to the Barbican which is the historic original part of
Plymouth which is, interestingly enough, where the Mayflower
left to colonise America. And there’s huge history there,
including, ooh, there’s all sorts, there’s the oldest baker’s
oven in the south, I think, is in the Barbican, and things like
that. It’s cobbled streets and wood beam buildings. It’s — so we
then go through there, through the Barbican and into the water.
In the water we’re mostly based in the Catwater which is the
bottom of the Plym river around the Barbican, in between the
Barbican and Mountbatten, which is where they actually built
the flying boats from. And the, yeah , the tour stays — you
stay in the water but you do — we cruise out underneath the Ho
where you can look out and see the main breakwater, a mile or
two miles away. It’s also the Tinside Pool which they’ve
recently refurbished, which is a saltwater-fed swimming pool.
We then head back and out of the water. From there we go along
to the Ho where you’ve just been in the water beneath, so you
can relate with that. And it was on the Ho that Sir Francis
Drake was playing bowls and up there there’s a big statue of
him as well. And then from there we make our way round the
citadel, which is the — now the base of 29 Commando Royal
Marines Artillery, and — but it’s been a fortification in
Plymouth for, for as long as. The — from there we then go down
back to the start point. So it’s an all-encompassing tour
covering all ages of history of Plymouth.

Catherine: Fantastic. How long does the tour last in total?

Sam: The tour lasts about an hour and a quarter.

Catherine: And how much of that are you on the water?

Sam: It’s roughly half-half. That’s obviously very dependent on
traffic within the town.

Catherine: And obviously if you’re going on the road and the
water there must be quite tight safety regulations, if you’re
going on the road with other cars and going on the water as
well.

Sam: The safety implications are huge. We actually have to — The
vehicles are built to a specification, they’re built to be PSVs,
they’re buses basically, on the road so they have to come up to
bus standards, so we have to comply with all the European and
UK legislation, — bus legislation for passenger-carrying
vehicles which is — will be on the road. Then when we enter the
water, we come under the MCA, which is the Maritime and
Coastguard Agency, and they have another set of regulations for
passenger vessels. We are a Class 5 passenger vessel which means
we’re based — we’re limited to inland, inshore waters, and we
have to carry lifejackets for the complement of people onboard
plus 10 per cent, we have to have life-saving floats, we have
to have life buoys, we have to have bilge pumps, anything, fire
pumps, fire extinguishers, anything that’ll — that could
possibly go wrong, we are tested on and we have to cover. So
the — it’s been fun cos obviously we have the MCA and the VOSA
who are the road people don’t always agree but, so, it’s a lot
of equipment on one machine.

Catherine: Yes, but obviously if you’re carrying passengers then
you obviously have to adhere to those standards.

Catherine: What kinds of tourists do you think Ducks ‘n’ Drake
appeal to?

Sam: Well, the amount of people in Plymouth that — the majority
of tourists, that’s what I was looking for — , the majority of
tourists coming to Plymouth are actually on coach parties from
other parts of the UK so we will pick up a lot of people from
the coach — tour coach trade and that combined with the
Americans, cos the Americans come to see the Mayflower Steps
where their forefathers left from. Our tour goes straight past
those steps.

Catherine: What do they think of that when they see it? Do you
get any feedback?

Sam: Yeah, they — a lot of ‘oh gee’ and ‘wow’ and they get to
see it. And cos of the nature of the tour they get to see
actually both stones, they see the top side of it where they’re
— and they see it from the water, so they can see all aspects
of the Mayflower Steps, and then they get off, a lot of them
actually head down there, head down to the Barbican and walk,
go walking, cos you can actually walk up and down on the steps,
so they can re-enact their forefathers leaving.

Catherine: And have the people of Plymouth been quite supportive
of this project? I’d imagine it’s a bit of a shock at first,
seeing something bright yellow cruising round the streets of
Plymouth.

Sam: Yes, they have.

Catherine: They have been supportive?

Sam: Yes, they have been supportive. I mean, people are more
good, but mostly curious. You know, it’s a 9 and a half tonne
machine with — 10 metres long, and 4 metres high and bright
yellow with no windows on the side so people — you can hear
people chatting on it and screaming and having fun on there,
so, you know, it’s something very different and they’re not
used to. But, having said that, they’ve all been very
supportive of it. The local councillors, et cetera, have
supported us all the way through and the local officers of the
MCA and the Road Traffic Commission et cetera have all been
very helpful. And that’s just, you know, that’s the
bureaucratic guys. The local people are all fascinated by it,
they all want to come and have a go, and they all want to chat
and talk about it. And because of the history here, there’s a
lot of people that know the machines, know the original DUKWs
that they’re based on. Several times we go out and we’ll be
just sat waiting on the slipway and someone’ll come along and
say "Oh, I drove those during the war" or

Catherine: Really?

Sam: Yes, a lot of that happens. Cos they were originally — the
Americans actually constructed them here.

Catherine: In Plymouth?

Sam: In Plymouth. Yeah , they constructed a huge amount of them
here. Actually at Queen Anne’s Battery, which is now a marina
which is also where our slipway is. So the slipway we’re using
was used by the original machines to launch once they’d been
put together over here, in flat-pack form and then constructed
over here and sent onto the ships. So there’s a lot of history
with Plymouth and the original machines, not, you know — and
then obviously when we come along people are coming from all
sorts of walks of life to come and have a chat.

Catherine: So it makes sense to have them back in Plymouth?

Sam: Makes perfect sense.

Catherine: Brilliant. Thank you very much.

Sam: My pleasure.

Catherine: Thank you.

