McGrath: My name is Margaret McGrath. I was a Ryan before I
married. I was born in 1929 just after World War II and
everything was still rationed at that stage, flour, bread,
everything, tea, sugar, everything was rationed and in the
village, there was a big shop that kept everything and when the
lorry would go to Limerick on a day, they'd bring back bags of
flour, 6 stone, 7 stone bag of flour. We'd have to watch that
lorry coming in to go and collect the flour or we wouldn't be
able to get it as everything was rationed. Then when about the
time I was 13, my mother was in hospital and my 2 sisters who
were younger got the measles and I had to look after them, and
I had to bake bread for my father and 2 brothers that were
working in the bog,  twas  in the month of May. And I was going
for my Confirmation at the same time. And the nun sent down for
me to tell me, get me up for instruction every day 12 o'clock,
and I wasn't going up. They sent down somebody for me and I
went up and the head nun said to me Would you ever get it int
to that thick skull of your that everybody can be done without!
There's nobody in this life indispensable ! As I was making all
sorts of excuses why I wasn't going up for instruction. Then
when I was about 14 maybe, we worked in the bog every summer,
our school holidays. We took banks of other people to save the
turf for them to make a few bobs and we'd buy a pair of shoes
or maybe a nice frock or something to wear out of the money.
And that was how things were done in those days.

Valerie: And do you go to school at the time?

McGrath: Oh we were going to school all the time. I left school
at 14. I came to work in Kiltila when I was 16 years of age as
a cook and I worked there for about 3 years when I met my
husband. He was the gardener in the big house. And at 19, we
got married in all our innocence thinking that everything was
going to be a bed of roses because I'd never seen my husband
turned out to be an alcoholic as it happened, and I never had
any dealings with alcohol in our home because my father never
drank. So I didn't know what I was letting myself in for and it
took me 3 years to realise that I had a problem on my hands, but
it was too late then, we were married, had to get on with it.
When our first child was born, I left my job and from then on,
I had to find work wherever I could find it. I worked in the
hotel, I was very lucky really because most of the people
around the area were relations of my husband's, and there was 2
families in particular, that didn't have any children of their
own. So they would take me on to do the work and they would
mind the children for me while I done it. Then that went on for
years and my husband left his job in Kiltila. He went to
Annabeg, another big house, and it was an Englishman that owned
it at the time, and he didn't stay very long in Annabeg and he
was leaving, and he asked the herdsman, he was giving all his
staff compensation, and he asked the herdsman to know what he
would do he says with this man he says we can't give him money,
he'll drink it. And the herdsman told him to give him a cow. So
we had no place to keep a cow. They were giving me a young cow
but I said no, I wanted something that was quiet that I'd be
able to handle. And they gave me a big Hereford cow, and that
cow grazed along the road, we used to call it The Long Acre.
There's what we call the New Line, we go out one end of it and
then you come in the other, you see. The cow grazed all along
the side of the road and came back in the evening to be milked.
And at that time they had 2 cows in the hotel, and I milked 3
cows every morning and 3 cows every night, and I'd keep my own
cow in the shed and let her off again in the morning. That
really stood to me because the kids needed milk. The milk was
terrific, 2 big bucket of milk night and morning, and at stages
we were sending the milk to the Creamery. We had so much of it.
The milk used to be collected by a lorry in those days. And the
milkman would stop at the gate and he's pick up the churn and
take mine in whenever I had it. Then I bought 2 banbhs and put
them in the back shed and I fed them and when they were ready
to be slaughtered, we sent them to the factory, and my cow, she
had 3 sets of twins. It was great. I was really very lucky, you
know, when you think about it that it could have been a whole
lot worse. But I was so lucky in everything, things just seemed
to fall into place as I needed it.

Valerie: Yeah, and how many children do you have?

McGrath: I had 8.

Valerie: You had 8. So this cow in a way helped.

McGrath: Oh she reared them, I mean there's nothing as good for
children as milk, you know, and everything they eat was
semolina, tapioca, rice, everything was milk, bread puddings,
everything they ate was made with milk, and they'll grow up to
be fine, big strong children. I said there is a God there
because there's no way I could have coped with 8 children and
an alcoholic husband with no money coming in. I'd never seen a
penny of his wages for the 37 years I was married, and there
was no way I could cope and feed them and keep going if I
didn't have the help. So I mean, there is a God there.

Valerie: Yeah, right, and this was after Second World War.

McGrath: This was after the Second World War.

Valerie: In the 50's where the recession was

McGrath: Yeah, when the recession was. Sure everybody was in the
same boat in those days. Nobody had anything like, you know,
life was very simple really, there was no machines, there was
no washing machines, there was no dryers, there was no cookers,
there was no fridges, there was none of those things. You had to
make do with whatever you had and hard work, everything was a
hard slog. You had to wash your clothes in a tub of water, well
a washboard. I'd be doing that at night to make sure that I'd
have them ready for to put out on the line in the morning
before I go to work. And I'd made all their clothes, old
clothes. His sisters were in England. They were in England
during the war and they were still in England. And they used to
send clothes. I cut down the clothes and make small clothes for
the family out of them, and I'd be up half the night doing
that, and knitting their jumpers. When they got their communion
and their confirmation, they were dressed in white jumpers that
I knit for them and grey pants that I made for them, and they
stood out in the crowd, you know, all the rest of the kids were
dressed in suits and frocks and you name it, but ours were
ready-mades, no they weren't, they were hand-made. They got by,
I mean, they didn't crib about wearing them either because they
didn't know any better, you see. Nowadays you give them to a
child (unfinished sentence) .

Valerie: Too much maybe.

McGrath: Well, you see, kids today have too much anyway. They
wouldn't wear something that they think, mine, I know, mine
wouldn't anyway because I tried it a few times. I says there's
a lovely frock there now, I'm after making it out for them, no
way! They would have to buy their own now. Nowadays, the
problem is with nowadays, you see, all these good things are
establised, you see, and people don't want to let go of them.
They think they're entitled to them now. But in those days,
they wouldn't dare, you see. There was no overheads, there
wasn't even electricity.

Valerie: So what do you burn?

McGrath: Candles and oil lamps. I remember one evening I went to
town. My mother used to come to me when I'd been having the
children, she'd come mind the kids. But normally I had to ask a
neighbour to keep an eye on them when I want to go into town,
I'd go on a bicycle and do a bit of shopping when I'd have a
few bob in my pocket. And I remember going to town this day and
of course rushing back, I was always in a rush to get back to
feed them or to do something. But anyway, I was coming up
along. My mother was minding them at the time one of the kids
was after being born. And I had to get off the bike to go up
the hills, you see, and I got off the bike and going up the
hills, and I was looking up the road, I saw my mother up on top
of the house and I said Am I seeing things, is that my mother up
there? I couldn't believe it and I got nearer and I said Oh My
God. Here's my mother on top of the house! So I went in anyway
and I says to her, I said What in the name of God are you doing
up there? Well she says The kids were playing with the ball and
the ball went up on the roof and they asked me to get it. She
was so naive like, when she got up, they brought down the
ladder for her to get up on. She got up on the ladder, when
they got her up on the roof they took away the ladder. But of
course, I felt like laughing needless to say like, you know,
but I couldn't very well, because she'd kill me when she'd come
down. But I thought twas so funny-fiddler on the roof. They were
such devils, you see, and they were wild as march hares because
there was no one to control them like, you know.

Valerie: And there was no TV at the time to keep them occupied.

McGrath: And there was no TV at the time, you see, they used to
play ball, sure they have every window in the house broken,
putting the ball through, you know. And the neighbours were
giving them a hand, of course, needless to say. But anyway,
that was fine, and I went on another day and Peggy was what, 14
I think or 15, she was the eldest, I left her minding them I
said no I said I'm after buying a bag of coal because I was
after getting a few bob somewhere, you see, I bought a bag of
coal now I said, it was the only way we had a cookier in the No
8 Stanley range. So I left a bucket of coal beside of range. I
said to Peggy, I said Keep a few lumps of coal on that fire.
Don't let it quench because I said I have to cook the supper on
that when I come home. I said Only a few lumps now just to keep
it going. So Peggy, of course, was outside playing with the
rest of them and she got the bucket of coal and she threw the
whole bucket of coal into the range.

Valerie: It was on fire.

McGrath: And I had a row of napkins now, we had no paper nakpins
in those days, you see twas cloth napkins and I had a big row of
napkins in a line over the range, you see. And the range got so
red that the napkins were about to take off when I got in the
door I nearly had a heart-attack, when I didn't have a
heart-attack that day, I never would. The napkins were about to
take off and I just dragged them off the line and got a bucket
of water out of the tank outside the back door and doused it.
But I'm telling you, it frightened the daylights out of me.

Valerie: So coming into 60's, that's the kind of women's
movement, isn't it? Like women's rights and things like that.

McGrath: That's right yeah. Well of course, I didn't take notice
of any of those because there was no point like, I mean, there
was nothing, I could get nothing if I decided to leave my
husband with a couple of kids, there was no place to go. Social
welfare wasn't providing anything for people in those days. You
could die with the hunger. Your husband was there to support
his wife and family, and that was his job, and if he couldn't
do the support, that was too bad. You'd just have to do the
best you could with as little as you had. Even as little as you
had, You had to do the best you could.

Valerie: Because there was no jobs out there.

McGrath: There was no jobs, no, there was nothing. There was
really nothing, I mean, when my father was working, he was in
bad health the latter years, he used to have to walk 4 or 5
miles everyday to work. Then eventually he got a bicycle and he
used to cycle to work. There was no cars, no nothing in those
days. Life was so simple. You've done your days work. The
farmers'd be out in the field at 5 o'clock in the morning with
their horses and ploughs working, and they'd be working until
dark at night. Youngsters today won't know what work is. They
haven't a clue. They were tough times. Well they were tough
times for everybody like, you know. And worse for more,some,
some of them got it harder than others like. Like anybody that
had a good husband and that's able to get work and able to feed
them, they weren't so bad. But the ones that had had got
alcoholic husbands like me, they are the ones that got it
tough. And there was a few of them around. I wasn't alone on
that, you know.

Valerie: But for women who were able to get jobs, say as civil
servants or teachers, back in the 60's, if they get married,
they had to quit their jobs?

McGrath: Oh they had to quit their jobs, once they got married,
they were gone. They had to leave their jobs.

Valerie: And that's the so-call Marriage Bar, isn't it?

McGrath: That's it. The Marriage Bar, you see, women weren't
even allowed in a pub in those days. Oh No. Twas a terrible
thing if you saw a woman in a public house. But the day they
allowed the women in, I shouldn't be saying this but, I don't
think it helped the family scene.

Valerie: But coming into the 70's, it was the optimism, wasn't
it? Things started picking up, the Marriage Bar was lifted in
73 and people were looking forward to future, to a better
(unfinished sentence) .

McGrath: Yeah, twas grand to get the, women felt like this is
great, we can get out of the house for a while like, you know,
we get away with our routine, and twas a break for them and it
was good for them to get out, away and do their job and come
home. But more and more the kids were being neglected, they
were sent to others to mind like, you know. Most of the kids
today would see their parents maybe for an hour at night before
they go to bed. They'd be lucky if they did see them for an hour
before they go to bed.

Valerie: And I suppose that's the result of this so-called
Celtic Tiger in the 90's isn't it? There were so many jobs out
there and people, like, parents were working and kids were
home.

McGrath: And they were buying houses and paying mortgages and
now they're stuck with them.

Valerie: Yeah, they're stuck with them. And now it's the 21st
Century.

McGrath: Yeah, Well, we'll never go back to the times that I was
born. You'll never see them again because everything is changed.
They are used to good times now, they're used to having cars,
they're used to having cookers and all the rest of it, washing
machines and dryers. They'll stay there, right, they will get
by hook or by crook. There's no way they'd go back to the hard
times that we were born in.

Valerie: Yeah, yeah. And you just celebrated your 80th birthday
2 days ago

McGrath: I certainly did celebrated it alright and so did
everybody else. .

Valerie: Did it go well?

McGrath: Oh it went marvelous! We had a great night, and
everybody said they had a great night. So I was happy because
they were happy. That's good. Tis something to remember, yeah.

Valerie: Yeah. And if you can change anything, what would you
change?

McGrath: Well, I don't know. Well as I said already, I was very
lucky to be born strong and strong-willed and fit, physically
strong. I was very lucky because if I wasn't, I'd never have
been able to come through, I mean, I'd have to get rid of the
kids, there's no way I could be able to keep them. I wouldn't
be able to cope with them if I wasn't so strong-willed and
physically strong for the hard work because it was hard work. I
used to sit on the chair every morning when I get up and I'd say
Thank you God for bringing us through the night. And I don't
care what problem you send me today as long as you keep the
kids safe. It was my one aim in life. If the kids weren't safe,
well if the kids weren't safe, I'd probably fall pieces because
I mean, they were my life, I worked hard for them and that was
what I wanted to do. So I've done it. But I don't know, would I
ever change anything. I mean, I feel I have achieved something.
I mean, I know it was tough at the time and I wasn't feeling
like that when I was going through it. But now that I look back
on it, I said Well, you know, you should be proud of yourself
you have achieved something, you have kept your family
together, you have them and they're still there and that you've
done the best you could with what you had. But I don't know. I
don't think I would change anything.

Valerie: Right. And is there any more achievement that you would
like to do?

McGrath: Well, I don't know now, I'm 80 years of age now and I
mean, I'm getting less agile and I'm getting less, well I'm
like an old car now, I'm beginning to wear out, yeah.

Valerie: A vintage one.

McGrath: A vintage car! Yeah, I mean, it's a great feeling to
know you've done good. I mean, it gives you a peace of mind
which is very very necessary for anybody that, you know, that
you've done what you could, you couldn't have done any more,
and that's a great feeling to have, yeah.

Valerie: Yeah, that you always try your best

McGrath: Yeah, you've done your best and you've achieved what
you set out to do, yeah.

Valerie: That's great. Thank you very much, Mrs. McGrath!

McGrath: You are very welcome.

Valerie: Thank you.
