Michael: My name is Michael O'Mahony. I'm from Ballyhea in North
Cork. I might look 20-something but I'm 30-something. And
basically I'm a farmer. So my Dad was a farmer before me, so
I'm the only child in the family. And I had a decision to make.
I went to college for 4 years after my leaving cert, and my
father was in poor health at the time. And, you know, I had to
decide whether I wanted to continue and keep the thing going or
doing my own thing. So I decided to give it a go for a while and
I'm still there, I suppose, you know, so.

Valerie:  Right. So is that the tradition? Irish tradition like
father passes on the farm to the children, especially sons?

Michael: Yeah.

Valerie: Right and you're the only son in the family?

Michael: I'm the only one there, full stop! So, you know, I
suppose it's a tradition that was always there but it's not
being continued to the same degree now because there're more,
well up to a couple of years ago, there were more opportunities
for people, you know, to travel and what not. And I suppose
people feel that there was a lot of work involved in farming
and for the income you'd be getting out of it, you know, you
find lots of the time that you have a farmer there, you've his
family reared and first thing you hear is you have no interest
in the farm or whatever so, you know, it was sold or whatever
else you know.

Valerie: Right. And how many years are you in farming now?

Michael: 13 years.

Valerie: 13 years.

Michael: Yeah.

Valerie: And you just said that you're from Cork.

Michael: Yeah.

Valerie:  And Cork is actually part of this famous region called
Golden Vale. Can you explain Golden Vale to us?

Michael: Well, I suppose it's very fertile ground, you know.
It's, I suppose, it's good pasture land and you need pasture
and good pasture land for dairying, you've more options, I
suppose, you know. If you've better ground, obviously you can
do more things with it. And, you know, it's an intensive
dairying area, let's say.

Valerie: Region-wise it covers 3 counties, doesn't it?

Michael:  It does, 3 counties, yeah. There's Tipperary, Limerick
and North Cork, we'll say. But, you know, as I said the land is
of good quality and you can do a lot with good quality land
because, you know, there're different parts of the country that
have very poor soils and what not and, you know, it's very
difficult for them to diversify or anything like that, you
know. And the tradition is there for dairy farming in the area.

Valerie:  Right, so in terms of qualification, you don't
basically need any qualifications to become a farmer, do you?

Michael: Oh You do.

Valerie: You do?

Michael:  You do, yeah. Say my case was slightly different but
in most cases you have to serve an apprenticeship with
different farms, you know, there's different, I suppose,
courses to be added to the, we'd say, the theory added to the
practical, we'd say, on an apprenticeship. In my case, I had a
degree in business studies degree, so all I had to do was do 2
courses. There were 80 hours in total, 3 weeks in one place and
2 weeks in another. And when you completed those, you add that
to your own degree and qualify, kind of, you know.

Valerie: What do you raise in the farm?

Michael: Well, I have dairy herd and I have beef cattle, you
know, so about roughly around 120 animals in the herd, but like
the primary production, I suppose, is dairy, you know. It's cows
that produce milk and like after that the beef thing is meat,
and you know, that'll be going to either been sold on as calves
or year-and-a- halves as they say or sold to the factories when
they're finished as 2-year-olds.

Valerie: Right. And you just mentioned earlier because of the
working hours so the job itself is not that attractive, so what
is the everyday routine for you?

Michael: Well, I suppose when you're in dairying, the first
thing I'd be doing from, I suppose, from maybe February til
November / December, well November anyway is you're going to be
milking twice a day, you know, so either you have to do it
yourself or if you're not around, you'll have to get somebody
else to do it, so that's pretty fairly long commitment like to
be giving during the year. It's ok when the prices of milk are
good but this year and last year have been going back an awful
lot. So the milking would be twice a day, that's the main part
of it. Other things in that depends on the season you're at,
like if it's winter time, cattle are indoors you know and
you'll be carrying silage into them or feeding or whatever else
is involved, and, you know, that'd be part of your day. But in
this time of the year, we'll say, you know, you'll be making
paddocks of fields, in other words, you're dividing them into
different sections and they'll be grazing here one day and when
they're gone out of it, you fence up and you put up fertiliser
or whatever it is to get the grass going in. And this time of
the year there'd be different routines, let's say, than winter
time, you know.

Valerie: What time do you have to get up to milk the cattle? Is
it cattle or cows?

Michael: Cows.

Valerie: Cows.

Michael: It depends really, I mean, if you're not, there's
nobody actually knocking at your door and say you have to be up
at such a time, but I think most people would be up by, say, six
or half six and like that's the only one other thing I suppose,
we'd say, in farming is that you don't have to travel to, you
know, you don't have to sit in the car and drive an hour to
work, you know. If you get up, it's there waiting for you like.
So I think most people usually finish by 8 o'clock or milking in
the morning, you know, around 8 or half 8.

Valerie: And what do you do after 8? Do you go back to bed or?

Michael: No, God, no. Read the paper for a bit maybe. I suppose
after that then , you know, you've other things to be doing. I
mean the milk is collected every second day, you know, the milk
lorry will come and collect it. So you have to go and wash out
bulk tanks and, you know, clean out milking parlours and
different things, and as I said like, you know, there might be
slurry to be spread, there might be fencing to be done, there's
no set pattern for every particular day. You just have to do
whatever has to be done and, you know, that's the way it is
like.

Valerie: And how many cows you have?

Michael: I have just over 50.

Valerie: Over 50. And how much milk do they produce a day?

Michael: Well, it varies, you know. But I suppose it could be
about 5 or 6 gallons, you know, in general.

Valerie: So what happens after you milk the cow? What do you do
with the milk before it can be sold in the market?

Michael:  Well, I suppose, as I said, they collect it every
second day, so the first thing you'll do is there'll be usually
4 milkings in the bulk tank by the time they'll collect. So
you'll have to cool that, the bulk tank will cool it down to
temperature under 4 degrees usually. Like before you obviously
put the milk into the tank, you'll have to check and make sure
everything is ok because, you know, some cows might have
mastitis (inflammation of the breast tissue) or something that
the milk mightn't be suitable so or if they were treated with
some medicine, you know, there'll be s withdrawal period,
you're not allowed put the milk into the tank, you know.
There'll be tests carried out all the time as well so if you
had an animal, had injected the animal with something, if there
was something wrong with her and you had milked her up by
mistake even, that would show up on the test you know. So you
have to have your eyes open all the time. But in terms of when
they collect it then, it's carried into the processing plants
and goes from there to the wholesaler before it ends up in the
supermarkets, you know.

Valerie: Where are your markets and who buys your products?

Michael:  Well, I suppose Kerry Group are the group that we're
supplying to at the moment, they are taking most of the
customers in our locality, you know, in Limerick and Clare,
back in Kerry as well. So, now, you can supply to other
companies, but, you know, they're not gonna come out of their
way to you like especially, you know, unless there're some
other people around. So Kerry are who we supply so, you know.
In terms of beef side of it then, you can sell your calves to
other farmers if you want to, you can sell them at the mart,
you can finish them when they're 2 years old or whatever, and
you can carry them off to factories and that's where they'll
(unfinished sentence).

Valerie: Right, what's the average lifespan for a cow?

Mike: Well, of course, it depends on the farmers, I suppose.
Some people would hold on to cows as long as they're able to
stand maybe. I suppose in general I suppose we'd say they calve
at 2 years of age, we'd say, they produce milk from that point
on, so from 2, usually by the time they're about 8, you get 6
years out of them maybe, you know. After that, you could
continue with them but the yields would go back and the quality
milk wouldn't be as good.

Valerie: And what about beef? Like when do you send them to the
market?

Mike:  Well, it depends then, I suppose, what kind of set up you
have, you know. Some people will take them as calves and, you
know, some people, say in West Ireland, would take your calves
and they rear them off for certain period of time, whereas in
terms of, you can hold on to your cattle until they're 2 years
of age and finish them off, you know, you have to have them in
a certain condition before you send them to the factory, so
depends really what you're doing like, you know. If they have
the feeding for them, if they have the grass for them, maybe
you can finish them, you know, and they'll be yours from the
first day they were born till they go to the factory whatever,
but a lot of people would sell them. We sell some of them and
finish more of them, you know.

Valerie:  Right. And what rules and regulations do you have to
abide by?

Mike:  Well, there's number of directives I suppose. I suppose
the first thing about beef cattle or any animal that's born,
you've to put a tag on them, you know, and from that moment,
you're given an identity card for that animal, and that animal
then is traced, you know, I mean, if you sell that animal after
a year old and we'll say maybe something happens down the line,
there's a problem, they can trace that back to you, you know,
that's where that calve originated from or something like that.
But that'd be all standard thing, you'd have a herd test every
year, you're tested for TB and Brucellosis, if you don't pass
either of those, your herds are restricted for a while, you
won't be able to move them on until they pass a number of tests
again. Then you have the likes of nitrates directives. There's a
lot of environmental stuff involved in farming now, you've to
basically, you know, in terms of spreading slurry and so on,
you have a certain time period during the year as to when you
can spread this, you know, let's say, from I think it's from
January to about September or October actually. And there is a
close period after that when you're not supposed to spread, you
know. You then basically have to have a storage capacity to
maintain, to hold the slurry over the winter months maybe for 4
months, you know. So there's a lot of buildings involved to hold
all of that. Then I suppose in terms of medicines and so on,
you've to keep records and you have to, you know there's
withdrawal periods and different things and, you know, they're
the most of them anyway. There's a hundred more of it, you
know, but they are the main ones I suppose.

Valerie:  Right. And over the years of your farming experience,
have you noticed any climate change? And if so, what type of
climate changes?

Mike:  You look out of the window there, it's raining, so I
think it's been raining, it appears to be raining non-stop for
3 years like. Well, it makes things much more difficult like.
There's no doubt about that because I mean first of all, when
you have particularly heavy cattle, if they're out on ground,
you know, they're gonna destroy it and they're gonna mark it
and everything. And the best thing you can do then is put them
in. But when you have to put them in, you see, you have to feed
them, then you have to have the feeding for them, and it's
adding to your expense because it's a lot less expensive to
have them out on grass, you know, rather to be making silage
and feeding them inside. And then when they're inside, like
there's slurry being produced and that's extra work again
cause  that has to go back out afterwards. So, you know, if you
got good weather, it'd make a big difference.

Valerie:  Right. What are the best and worst parts of your job?

Mike: I suppose, as I said, like, you're your own boss, I
suppose, you know, which is a good thing because at least you
can kind of plan yourself, you can try and do what you can, you
know, yourself, you're not being ordered around by somebody, one
person anyway, we'll say. As well as that then I suppose you're
outdoors like and, you know, in general  tis  healthier, now
you wouldn't like to be out there today but at the same time,
you know, it's maybe better to be out in the open, at least
you're exercising and what not. You're not stuck behind the
chair, looking at this screen all day like. And I suppose
they'd be the main things, you know. As I said you don't have
to drive to work either, saves you a bit of time. So they are
the main things I suppose if you're living in the countryside.
It's a good lifestyle as well, I suppose, you know. The bad
side of it then, I suppose, you know, there are a lot of hours,
there's no doubt about it, and the prices you get have gone up
and down in the last number of years, I mean the milk price at
the moment is a third of what it was 2 years ago. I mean I was
just passing down there this morning, and there was a price of
a litre milk was one nineteen, we're getting 22 cent a litre,
you know. So, that's nearly 6 times of what we're producing.
It's actual 6 times as the price in the shop, you know. So if
things were improved a little that way,  t'wud  help a lot
like, definitely income, no point working on long hours if
you're not getting something out of it. And I suppose a lot of
regulations in it as well, like, you know, some of them are
sensible but more of them are, you know, as I said, like, in
terms of spreading slurry, it's alright to have a close period,
but maybe the weather would be better in the close period than
it will, you know, when you're supposed to be spreading it, you
know. So a small bit of give and take here and there would make
things a lot easier, you know. So, they'll be the main thing I
suppose.

Valerie: Right. You're happy to be a farmer.

Mike: I'm happy for the time being anyway.

Valerie: Great. Thanks very much, Mike.

Mike: Ok.
