Catherine: Hello.

Stephen: Hello.

Catherine: Thank you very much for agreeing to give an interview
today. Could you just start by introducing yourself please?

Stephen: Yes, of course. Hello, my name is Stephen and I live in
Cleeve in the South-West of England.

Catherine: Yes. Could you say a little bit more perhaps about
the region and where we are here today?

Stephen: Yes, indeed. We’re about 12 miles south of Bristol
which is a large city in England. In fact as I think it’s the
sixth largest city in England. We live in a small rural village
on the edge of the Mendip hills and we’re about 4 miles from the
sea with the River Severn and the Channel leading into the
Atlantic. So it’s a beautiful area. Bristol, for those who
don’t know much about it, is quite an industrial city. It was
famous for its navigation and trade in the early years with
America and the West Indies. But nowadays it’s very famous for
its Airbus and making aircraft jointly with the French. So a
thriving city.

Catherine: Concorde started here, didn’t it?

Stephen: Yes, Concorde first flew from Bristol a very long time
ago. And there is — the last flying one is actually now a
museum piece here in Bristol. We also have in Bristol a very
famous ship, the SS Great Britain which was the first iron-clad
steamship ever built and with propellers and it was built —
designed and built by a very famous gentleman called Isambard
Kingdom Brunel. Brunel built the railways throughout this
country, particularly in the South-West and the station at
Bristol is also one of his most famous. He also designed the
very first suspension bridge in the world which is still
standing and very much in use today, I would think nearly 200
years on from when it was built.

Catherine: So that’s about Bristol and that’s quite an
industrial city now, but the area here is obviously very rural,
isn’t it?

Stephen: Yes, indeed.

Catherine:  Yep . Do you enjoy much of the rural life here?

Stephen: Yes. Cleeve, as I say, is on the edge of the Mendips
and the Mendips are very famous for — they’re very much
limestone-based hills which means there’re a lot of gorges and
the most famous one is Cheddar Gorge which is about 7 or 8
miles from here. And we, where we live, our house, we have a
gorge just at the back of us which is very similar but a much
smaller version and is famous not just because of its high
sides but also for climbing and things like that and also its
caves. So, lovely area and, as I say, adjoining this we’ve got
the sea at places like Clevedon and a famous seaside place of
Weston-super-Mare.

Catherine: So it’s quite diverse?

Stephen:  Yeah , absolutely.

Catherine: You don’t seem to speak with a typical West Country
accent. How long have you lived in this area?

Stephen: That’s a very good question. I’ve been — we’ve lived
here since 1981. Before that though I grew up in the South East
or travelled a lot, so really I don’t have a regional accent of
any form, really.

Catherine: Was it quite difficult to integrate in the sort of
village life, then, when you moved here or was it quite
straightforward to become part of the life here?

Stephen: No, it was ac — yep , it was very straightforward,
actually, very easy, mainly because we had a young family, two
young boys, and that allows you to integrate very quickly. You
meet new families and the children meet new people and so on,
so we integrated very quickly from that point of view. Also I
came down here to work and you get to know new work colleagues
and people like that so that all helps. But villages, you know,
they work very well because — and again, with having a young
family, you start to get involved in various clubs and
societies, either helping directly or get — attending
functions, fundraising and so on. And it all breaks the ice and
makes for a really good, good life.

Catherine: And since you finished work, I know you used to work
for EDF down in Exeter

Stephen: Yes, yes, yes.

Catherine: which is further down into Devon, but now you’re
working at a school in Churchill which is another village near
here.

Stephen: Yes, that’s right. Churchill.

Catherine: I just wondered if you could tell us a bit about the
school and what sort of type of school it is, please?

Stephen: Yes. It is a large comprehensive school serving a rural
area again, probably 70 to 80 per cent of the students are
actually bussed in and out of the school because it is again in
a small village. It has about 1,650 students.

Catherine: That’s big for the area.

Stephen: It is, as I say again, because it’s pulling in from so
many small villages in the Mendip area. It — students go there
from the age of 11 in compulsory education till the age of 16.
And at that stage they sit exams called the GCSEs and from
there they can decide to then go on and study what we have in
this country called A-levels with a view for a further 2 years
education and if they’re successful there then they can go on
to a university. Or students can leave at the age of 16 and
p’raps go to a college where they can do more vocational
training or indeed look for a job.

Catherine: I understand that it’s got a sort of specialist
status, the school that you work at. Could you explain a bit
about what is special about your school?

Stephen: Yes, very much so. All comprehensive schools, state
schools nowadays, have a specialism of one form or another. At
our school we have a specialism in the performing arts and
we’ve had that since 2002. What that means is the government
give you extra funding to develop that particular area of
specialism. As I say, in our case, the performing arts is
mainly theatre, drama, music and dance. And that’s allowed us
the extra money to employ more specialists in those areas, to
employ technicians like a theatre technician, like a sound
engineer, and so on. So, as I say, it gives us the lead in that
aspect. The other thing with it is that because we’re
comprehensive, community school, part of the funding is to
develop relationships with the community and to encourage them
to come in and use our facilities. When we got the specialism,
it allowed us, for instance, to build a brand new dance studio,
purpose-built with sprung floor, dance mirrors and so on. But
obviously it’s only used for a few hours a day during school
time so we hire that out to the community at a very low rate,
for them to come in and use it. And it is used every night of
the week and often at weekends. Likewise with our theatre,
we’ve developed that and we regularly have shows, whether
they’re dance, whether they’re theatre, musicals and so on. So
getting the community to come along and use the school
facilities and building that relationship is a key part of what
the specialist status was meant to do and what we have done.

Catherine: So it’s to benefit the students obviously, but it’s
also got that wider impact as well.

Stephen: Absolutely. As it happens, I mean, both parties benefit
because a lot of our students are also into theatre clubs, they
go to dance schools, ballet schools, out of hours and it’s
those same people using our facilities and if so, they get
better at dance through that, they get better at dance through
being at school as well, so hopefully they learn a lot more a
lot quicker because of that.

Catherine: So the students that are at school, as well as doing
their performing arts training, they also follow a standard
curriculum, do they?

Stephen: Yes, they again, nothing changes there, it’s just
they’ve got more access to these other things as well but
they will do their mathe , maths, English and sciences and all
of the standard curriculum work. That will still be expected up
to GCSE level.

Catherine: And then in the Sixth Form Centre that you’ve got,
that’s presumably where they pick maybe 3 or 4 subjects to
start with and study those. So you do the A-levels which are
the academic qualifications. Do you do any extra, perhaps more
vocational, qualifications?

Stephen: Yes. Yep , absolutely. Well, the A-levels as you say
are much more academically focused, albeit you can do A-lev you
do A-levels in music and dance and in theatre. But now, a fairly
recent initiative over the last few years, they’ve started to
bring in diplomas in particular and the idea is to make them
much more vocational, much more interrelated with business. So,
for instance, if you do a diploma in Media Studies, that will go
right across a whole range of things and you’ll have the
opportunity perhaps to work with a local newspaper or in local
theatre and so on as part of your studies. You also have to
produce a lot more of your own work and perform it in front of
live audiences and so on. So very much more towards that area
than the academic. You’re not having to sit and write large
exams and things like that.

Catherine: And preparing them for when they leave school perhaps
as well.

Stephen: Hopefully for a career in the sort of thing they want
to follow. What it does do, I think, is give those people who
aren’t really academic, it gives them a lot more confidence and
belief in the things that they can do.

Catherine: And what exactly is your role at the school then?

Stephen: Well, again, that’s very interesting as well. I joined
the school when they got the specialist status in 2002, very
much on a part-time basis. I work — I average 3 days a week. My
role really was to look after all the performing arts
activities, to look after them administratively, make sure the
budget was managed, organise their diary and calendar of
events, help them when we put on shows and productions and so
on. But just as importantly to work with the community. So my
main brief is working with the community again to use our
facilities, to help fund the local schools is very important as
well, the junior schools where the students come from there to
our school, is to work with them and encourage them in
performing arts, et cetera. So very much a general role. Bit of
fundraising hopefully to fund some of the things that we put on
as well.

Catherine: What sort of shows and productions do you put on?

Stephen: It ranges from everything. At the top end we would do a
big musical. Last year we did ‘Jekyll and Hyde’ and this year
we’re doing ‘Into the Woods’. And in fact to give our
students experience there we use the Playhouse Theatre in
Weston-super-Mare which is a professional theatre which seats
650 people and we take it over for a week and do big
productions there. Then we run through, we do some Shakespeare
and theatre like that. We regularly do dance shows. Every year
we have a little competition with the students at the end of
the year called ‘Strictly Dance Fever’ and that is a great
evening. And probably the strongest area for Churchill is
music. We have a pretty well-known gospel choir who’re called
‘Youthful Spirit’ and it has 60 to 70 students in, probably
one third boys, two thirds girls and they go — they regularly
perform. They’re very popular with the Bishop of Bath and Wells
and he — they appear regularly at the Cathedral or at his
various parties where he’s meeting his clergy. They also do a
tour every year. This year they went to Austria and previously
they’ve been to Germany to Hildesheim which is actually twinned
with Weston-super-Mare.

Catherine: Oh right, OK. Have you had any of the schools from
Hildesheim over here or is that something you would look to do?

Stephen: We’ve had visits from students, yes. Generally they go
to Weston but since we’ve built up a relationship they do come
to us for a day and so on. In fact next year we’re going
because it’s an anniversary of the twinning anyway, so we
should hopefully have a good week out there.

Catherine: It’s a good reason to celebrate.

Stephen: Yes, indeed.

Catherine: And what is it, just to wrap up finally, what is it
about your job that you enjoy?

Stephen: It’s just great fun working with young people. Working
with community and people in the performing arts are very
enthusiastic people and that enthusiasm rubs off.

Catherine: The energy.

Stephen: Absolutely. But watching these young people perform and
the talents that they’ve got, it’s just staggering and you know
as the students leave you think, "Well, how are you going to
replace them?" but there’s another tranche of people coming
through, just as good, sometimes better. And it is watching
those people and thinking "Gosh, I wish I had one tenth of
their talent".

Catherine: I’m sure they appreciate you just as much as you
appreciate them. That’s great. Thank you very much for your
time. Thank you.

Stephen: Thank you.
