Norma: My name’s Norma Holt and I actually come from the Wirral
Peninsula which is on the west coast of Liverpool, which is
Lancashire, and we have Cheshire on one side and north Wales on
the other. And we also — we have the Dee river on one side of
the peninsula and the Mersey on the other.

Catherine: So the peninsula is between the two rivers.

Norma: Yes, yes.

Catherine: Right. And what’s the area like up there? Is it quite
industrial or agricultural?

Norma: Interestingly, it’s almost split in half. In the — in the
side that faces Liverpool is the industrial side. You have the
docks, the riverside. Used to be lots of warehouses where the
grains came in, all that sort of thing. And on the other, what
we used to call the posh side of the Wirral, is where all the —
the nice seaside is, if you like, all the big houses are, and
it’s more countryside, more of the farming goes on on that
side of the Wirral.

Catherine: OK. And could you talk a little bit about the Wirral
accent? I know that there’s obviously quite a range of accents
in that part of the country.

Norma: Well, I consider myself to have a Cheshire accent because
when I was born and I lived in — on the Wirral, it was a
Cheshire accent which is the accent I have now, although there
are overtones of the Liverpudlian accent. However, over the
years certainly it has changed and now it’s very much a
Liverpool accent and, you know, which — I’m not saying I
disapprove of it but I think it’s a lazy speech and you need to
actually think about what you’re saying. I know my nephew
sometimes’ll speak to me in the Liverpool accent and I’ll say,
"Please speak to me in English". But it’s things like ‘yeah’
and ‘you what?’, whereas, you know, mine is ‘yes’, ‘pardon’ or
whatever, cos I’m a bit old-fashioned in that way, so I do find
the accent is a bit harsh. And it’s interesting that actually
that accent is spread out into the, the parts of north Wales
that are very near to the Wirral, but the Cheshire side is
still very much a Cheshire accent.

Catherine: And you can tell the difference between those
different accents?

Norma: Yes, yes. You can. Very much so. You know, it’s very
interesting. I don’t know how far out — you know, north Wales
tends to now be thought of as part of the Merseyside population
because people have gradually moved out and it’s become a
computer (should be ‘commuter’) belt, but taken the accent with
them. There’s less of a Welsh accent in there, it’s more of the
Liverpool ac but I can certainly tell the difference between
somebody who’s truly Liverpudlian and somebody who has a
Cheshire accent, or a north Wales accent.

Catherine: Would you say that the idea of accent is quite
important for local identity?

Norma: I, I do think it’s — it is important. Well certainly for
me it’s important is identifying where you come from. I mean,
people often identify people from Birmingham with a Brummie
accent or a Liverpudlian accent knowing — people can focus you
in a place. I’m not quite sure whether a Cheshire accent has
that same strength but if I go home to visit, say, you will
notice when I come back that I’m speaking with a Liverpool
accent cos my family do, more so now, particularly my nieces
and nephews, and it’s around me on the Wirral so I come back
talking a little bit more like a Liverpudlian but I kinda lose
that in a short time.

Catherine: And obviously today we’re down in Taunton today. I’d
like to move on and talk a little bit about the work that you
do down here. Could you just explain where you work and what
you do for a living?

Norma: I certainly can. I’m actually a Senior Nurse on the
special care baby unit here in Taunton. It’s known as a
Somerset Neonatal Intensive Care Unit. I moved down here 21
years ago from Newcastle-upon-Tyne where I actually undertook
my midwifery training and did 6 weeks in the special care baby
unit there and actually was asked to go back after I qualified
and I never left, other than to go to Oxford to do my training
course and, and go back. And spent 12 happy years in the
neonatal unit. Came down to Taunton to actually manage the unit
which I did for 13 years and then felt time to let somebody else
take that burden on. And my role as a Senior Sister is to
coordinate the shifts. We have 4 intensive care cots, 4
high-dependency cots and the rest are special care. We can
indeed take babies from anywhere in the South-West, so we’re
talking about Cornwall to, you know, Gloucestershire. Bristol
is the main centre now, the big centre, and really we’re their
overflow, if you like. We probably take about 300 babies a year
into our unit, of varying degrees of wellness. We take — Sorry.

Catherine: Is it just premature babies that come to you or is it
babies who’ve got particular problems?

Norma: A neonate is a baby who is less than 28 days old,
regardless of the gestation. But we have babies in our unit
from 26 weeks gestation up to 44 plus weeks, and so it’s any
baby who is unwell. You might have a term baby who is actually
born with a pneumonia or swallows the meconium that they pass
in, and gets into their lungs and make them quite ill. Or they
may have a sepsis. Or, to the other extreme, born very early,
maybe a kilo in weight or less, and who need really to have
respiratory support, if you like. That’s the main sort of focus
of our premature babies’ needs, is to help them breathe cos
their lungs haven’t grown sufficiently. And so that’s the main
focus but, yes, we can take babies from the tiniest babies to
the big chunky ones. So it’s very variable in what we have to
do, which keeps us interested, I think, you know, and it gives
us a different perspective on parents’ needs from being —
having a very tiny baby to having a very big one who’s ill.

Catherine: And do you have provision for the parents to stay and
look after the babies as well?

Norma: We certainly encourage the parents to be involved right
from the start with their babies. Unfortunately we have limited
parent accommodation but we would always do our utmost to —
particularly for parents who’ve travelled from a long distance,
to find them accommodation. We have 3 bedrooms onsite. We have
the facility of a League of Friends bungalow in Musgrove Park
hospital and also the paediatric department sometimes has
parents’ rooms so we would do our best to support parents. We
would perhaps sometimes if we don’t really want — once the
babies are stable, if parents stay too long, they get what I
call stir-crazy, you know. They’re just like — they can’t think
of anything else and it’s not good for them mentally. They need
sort of to go outside and see the world’s still moving, you
know. So we would encourage them really to — after a while to
go home and, you know, just live a normal life, but visit as
often as they can. But yes, if parents want to stay we would do
our utmost to accommodate them.

Catherine: And the babies then stay with you until either
they’re well enough to go home or do they move then onto
other wards if they’re well enough?

Norma: They stay with us, generally. The only reason they would
move usually is because they need to go for surgery or other
tests that we don’t have the facilities for. So the most likely
place would be to Bristol. But if Bristol’s full we have gone as
far as Birmingham, Cardiff, Swansea, with the babies. But yes,
by and large, they stay with us. We tend to say — cos parents
always say "How long will the baby stay?" and we go "How long’s
a piece of string?" but, you know, we always say to them "By the
time they were due to be born" and it does seem to work out that
way. They either go home a week or two before or a week or two
after the due date and so that gives them a little bit of a
focus, rather than, you know, "We don’t know". Or the bigger
babies of 2 to 3 weeks and, you know, we try and sort of second
guess for the parents. But we do encourage them to stay.

Catherine: I’d imagine it must be a really stressful and often
quite distressing time for the parents if their babies are in
the special care baby unit. What sort of things can you try and
do there to make life as comfortable for the parents as you do
for the babies?

Norma: Yes. Yeah , I think that’s a very true point because it’s
only 10% of babies born in the UK go to special care nurseries
so of course most people don’t have any experience of it at
all. And as parents are having babies a bit later in life these
days, you know, girls are in their 30s sometimes, have very
little to do with knowing what's — what a baby is about, let
alone a premature baby. It’s a grieving process actually when
they first come for the baby that you imagine as a couple
that’s going to be blue-eyed, blonde-haired and, you know, is
it going to look like dad, is it going to look like mum? And if
you’ve got a very premature baby, you’ve got a baby that looks
like a skinned rabbit, basically, and doesn’t look like a baby
to the parents, you know. So that’s a grieving process and both
m , particularly mums, but both mums and dads do go through
that, where they have to accept that they haven’t had the baby
they imagined. So we have to support them in that. I think we
support them well in — because we keep them informed, we invite
them to participate in the cares as soon as possible. It might
just be something simple like moistening a cotton bud in
sterile water and wiping the baby’s mouth because it’s not
getting any oral feeding. And that’s scary cos the baby’s full
of wires, the monitors go off wh even when we put our hands in,
do things, you know, we can set the monitors off and the alarm’s
going so you can imagine a parent who thinks that, you know,
their baby is, you know, going to die if they make everything
going alarm. So you have to be able to listen. And you have to
be able to give them information in — not in a patronising way,
but in a way that it doesn’t make it too complicated and you can
say things like " Yep , that’s perfectly normal for your baby
who’s 28-weeker". And that’s — that is a relief to people. Yes,
they will need to go on a ventilator or they need to have some
respiratory support for so long. Yes, it’s OK for them to
vomit. You know, these sort of things.

Catherine: It must be reassuring for them to know that you’ve
been through all this before and that you’ve got the authority
to say it’s quite normal.

Norma: Yes. Well, it is. It’s interesting how many dads
particularly say "How long have you been doing this job?" and
course now I can say, well 20-odd — over 20 — well, I’ve been
doing it for actually 26 years so they’re quite impressed that
they — you know, that you do know what you’re doing but they
need to know that. They do need that reassurance that you need
— you know what you’re about because they don’t know and
they’re relying upon you to take care of the baby. I mean,
they read our faces and our body language so they know if the
baby isn’t quite as well as it was, you know, because the
nurses, big beaming smile and saying "Hi, you know, lovely to
see you", you know, it’s kind of, you know, "We need to just
talk about things" and so they’re very sensitive to body
language from us so you do have to be — take care that you
don’t frighten them, you know, when they come in for a visit
cos the par the mums particularly quite often say she waits to
see does the nurse smile at me or not smile at me. And you
don’t do it consciously but, you know, if you’ve got news to
say the baby isn’t quite so well then obviously you have this
vision of not smiling, you know.

Catherine:  Yeah . Do you ever have any problems with language
barriers in your work? I was thinking about, you know, people
who maybe move to the area who don’t speak English. Do you ever
have any problems like that? You’re trying to get this
information across.

Norma: Yes, we — . Yeah . I mean initially when I came to
Somerset no, there was very few people from other communities
and races. But in recent years, as we know, we’ve had a lot of
people coming over from Poland and we have had quite a number
of problems with communication. One of the things we do have,
we have a service where we have interpreters who will come and
translate for us. And another one which has been, I found, very
useful is using the internet, you know, because they have Polish
to English translations and although it’s not perfect and it
doesn’t really cover a lot of medical things, you can at least
give them some basic information. They can type in their
questions in their language and we can type in our, our answers
and it will be translated. I don’t know how perfect it is, I
don’t know how well — but the parents seem to enjoy it and
are happy that they can ask a question in their own language.
And we have been sort of starting having, you know, information
leaflets in their languages and — but yeah , we do. And we get
perhaps Chinese, that sort of thing but again we can ring up
and get an interpreter.

Catherine: So are you responsible for organising that or
somebody in your department?

Norma: Well, as individual nurses we are allocated to care for
babies, you know, each day. And if it’s your baby you’re
looking after and it needs an interpreter, then we would just
speak to the unit manager and she would then get onto the
relevant people to see if we can find — . We’ll try and find
somebody in the hospital first to see if, you know, cos it’s
easier to get them there, otherwise it has to be a three-way
link on a telephone but, you know, if —

Catherine: You do use telephone interpreting as well?

Norma: Yes.

Catherine: The interpreter doesn’t always come to the unit?

Norma: No, no, Not always, no.

Catherine: Right.

Norma: We can do that if we haven’t been able — . Our
switchboard has a list of people who have put their names down
and will interpret certain languages and so if you’ve got a
Chinese person who speaks Mandarin, we can usually find a
doctor in the hospital who — and they will come and try and do
it face-to-face. We do prefer that but we have used telephone
interpretations.

Catherine: Why do you prefer the face-to-face? Is it because you
feel that the parent is getting the information a bit more …

Norma: I think so. I think the interpreter will read body
language more and quite often in the, in — on the phone, it’s —
they’re anxious, it’s just an anxious voice, isn’t it. But
they’ll often interpret and maybe understand colloquial
speech and what the parent — something that might be very
simple to us, but is a major cultural thing to the parents. And
often the interpreter can say to us, "In our society, you know,
this is thought to be really difficult" or "We don’t like that
to happen" or whatever. So I think it’s good to have that
face-to-face if we can.

Catherine: And it’s an extra means of support for the parents
who are obviously going through a difficult time.

Norma: Totally. Yes, yes. Totally. It is — there must be nothing
worse than, you know, not being able to understand what’s going
on and what’s happening. And sometimes in their own countries
they don’t have the facilities we have here in England and, you
know, maybe their baby wouldn’t have survived, but here they
are, a baby with tubes in, monitors, people running around, you
know. It must be very frightening to you if you don’t know,
can’t understand it, you know. And actually a lot of the time
mums just want to know, has the baby taken any milk, has it not
vomited, you know, has it weed? They’re the important things
cos they’re the normal things a mum expects her baby to do.

Catherine: Is that what you find satisfying then about your job,
that you see parents and babies bonding and getting well?

Norma:  Yeah , I just think it’s a great privilege to be part of
a family, albeit for a short space of time, you know, to
actually support parents and be part of their child’s life.
It’s almost a gift to me personally to be able to, you know,
support them and love that little one, even though it’s not
mine and I’m not going to see it after a few months, but, you
know, just to give it as much love and care as we can.
Sometimes it’s sad and things don’t, you know, work out, but I
always believe that we have given them a chance. We’ve kept
them warm, we’ve loved them and we’ve given them, you know, the
best life they possibly can have. But sometimes it’s a good
thing that they don’t survive, you know, because major things
can go wrong, but it’s hard for the parents. But I feel very
privileged to do the job I do, you know. In fact, only the
other day a mum whose little one was going to be 6 in January
and he was 25-weeker, you know, came in to visit. And instantly
they remember you but of course at 300-and-odd people a year,
it’s quite difficult to remember but the parents remember
you, not — I’m talking about all the nurses because, you know,
each of us have an — you know, when you admit a baby, it’s much
more yours than if you’re just looking after it, you know, but
the mums remember you and the dads remember you. But it was
lovely to see this little one who was, you know, not very tall
but he was bright as a button and that’s the satisfying thing
that, you know, they got to take their son home and he’s having
a great life.
