Tony: Eighteen minutes past ten eighteen past nine in Queensland eighteen past seven in Western Australia. Navigating the world of treatment for menopause can be a nightmare. In the last month we've seen the cancellation of a seven year trial in the states   sending more shockwaves through the community. Already a topic that causes a lotta confusion, hormone replacement therapy or HRT, has been controversial since its widespread use in the early nineties but does that mean it's not beneficial for some people. Menopause is different for each woman uh some women suffer few side effects during the change as it's affectionately known and uh others suffer severe weight loss loss of sex drive uh mood swings and of course the dreaded hot flushes. So uh how do we make sense of everything that's on offer. To help us out tonight Dr Barry Wren is a guest. He is one of Australia's leading researchers in gynaecological research and the author of a book called Understanding Menopause and Hormonal Therapy a Woman's Guide and uh he joins me in the studio tonight Barry good to see you.

Barry: Yeah good evening Tony.

Tony: Well uh let's start out at the beginning. The change the menopause what in fact is it.

Barry: Well it's it's basically only just a time when a woman runs out of her own hormonal uh um production from her ovaries . It begins around about the age of forty-five it's usually completed by the age of fifty-five. There's an average of about fifty-one years for women in Australia. And when it does those hormones which um influence the way cells will respond have just stopped being produced. And as a result of that women begin to deteriorate in certain areas. For some women it's uh disastrous and for other women they just as you said sail through without any problems  whatsoever.

Tony: I I suppose uh menopause is a little more poignant at the moment simply because a lot of women waiting longer in life   uh before they uh have babies.

Barry: Uh exactly so I mean I I saw a lady only today who's aged thirty-five and is just going through the menopause at this moment. Her mother went through the menopause at the age of forty and uh uh her sister also went through uh at the age of thirty-eight so this lady at the age of thirty-five is now just starting her perimenopausal phase. She will almost certainly be completely out of all hormones within the next year and uh she's going to have another fifty years of uh menopausal uh symptoms and problems if we don't do something about it.

Tony: Gee whiz. Uh I I suppose that's a huge shock to her was she planning children or.

Barry: Well it wasn't a shock because she expected something like this. Uh she's already had four children so that's  uh uh she she was quite expecting that she's a very intelligent lady with a university degree and so on and so she was not unaware of the problems and she came along to get some help from this stage onwards.

Tony: One of the first things we need to have a look at tonight I think is the study in the United States   it's been going for seven years and uh it was uh cancelled because of uh the the some recent findings in the last month. Uh a lotta people not thrilled to death with this study uh a lotta people also supporting it. Um can you can explain to us exactly what the seven year study's all about.

Barry: Yeah sh sure Tony there's actually two studies done by the same group it's the National Heart Blood and uh Lung Institute in the United States. Back in early nineteen-nineties they decided that because hormonal therapy appeared to be doing such a great job for women   and helping to prevent uh heart attacks uh osteoporosis uh quite a few other problems   that uh they should do woo call a prospective randomised blinded study. So they recruited women into this study and they were given two types of hormonal therapy they were given either oestrogen plus progestogen or they were given oestrogen alone. The women who had the oestrogen alone were women who had a hysterectomy and the women who were on the combined therapy uh were women who still had their uterus intact. There were sixteen-thousand-six-hundred in the women taking hormonal uh combined hormonal therapy   and about eleven-thousand in the study taking oestrogen alone. Two years ago they released the study results of the first one that's the sixteen-thousand-six-hundred women   and it suggested that women who were taking hormonal therapy at that stage had an increased risk of heart attacks stroke breast cancer but a decreased risk of osteoporosis. Just two years later they stopped the oestrogen alone arm of the study because uh there didn't appear to be any major benefit and there was a slight increase in the risk of stroke. And they didn't cancel it they just said that it didn't appear after seven years to be any major advantage of carrying the study on any further . But there was no increased risk of uh heart attacks there was no increased risk of cancer in that group. So the big thing was why were all these studies showing some adverse results   and why were there differences between the two studies. Well when you look at the two studies there are some major flaws with the way they were structured. Most women in Australia going through the menopause are between forty-five and fifty-five years of age   and that's when they start getting their symptoms and they require some hormonal therapy. The studies in the United States recruited women who were somewhere between fifty and eighty years of age never having taken hormonal therapy beforehand. The .

Tony: So wuh when you say hormonal therapy that's even the pill.

Barry: Even the pill yeah.

Tony: Okay.

Barry: Most of these women uh had uh no symptoms whatsoever no hot flushes no sweats and that was deliberately chosen because they didn't want women   to enter the study with some hot flushes who would either go onto hormonal therapy and find out that they were um participated or not go onto the hormonal therapy go onto a placebo and still have all their symptoms. So all these women had to have no symptoms whatsoever when they entered the study. Their average age was sixty-three years  which was quite considerably almost fifteen years older than the menopause. When we look at their uh demography we find that um most of them were very very overweight and matter of fact over a third of them were regarded as being obese. Thirty-seven percent were being treated for high blood pressure and other cardiac problems. Twelve and a half percent were being treated for high cholesterol levels. Four and a half percent were diabetic. Um there are fifty percent of them were smokers or ex smokers. Now all these factors increase the risk of cardiac disease so you take this group of uh women who had no symptoms with a high risk of having a cardiac disease and give them a an oestrogen by mouth. Uh you might get a slight increase in heart attacks and stroke and that's exactly what they found. It was not surprising and we feel it is .

Tony: So you believe it was a self fulfilling prophecy almost.

Barry: Virtually so it was a flawed suh it was a good study I must say uh a a very well conducted study but on the wrong group of people. Uh here in Australia most of the women are not in that particular category they're not that old they don't have those underlying conditions.

Tony: Mm. Well uh f uh we'll start up with the pluses um uh mm perhaps you can describe what an average woman who was starting to go through the change would receive. Um as a treatment and what the benefits  of that was.

Gary: We've already said that the majority women going through the menopause will get hot flushes and sweats and they will have a dry vagina there will be an increase in uh osteoporotic changes. If they take hormonal therapy from the time of their menopause the beginning of all these symptoms then we can be sure they will have relief of those symptoms their vagina will remain moist and the risk of getting osteoporosis will be reduced considerably . The a large group of studies something like about a hundred and twenty that I've looked at which have been carried over the last forty years show that women who take hormonal therapy   from the time of the menopause without any underlying problems have a reduced risk of heart attacks and a reduced risk of uh some of the other major cardiovascular events. And uh this is something which is not shown up in this particular study this study suggest it's adverse . Which is un.

Tony: But you think it's a positive.

Barry: I think it's a positive yes I think it could be made a positive but women have to be very careful about. Obviously if a woman comes into my rooms at any stage at all who has some condition which would suggest that she may have an underlying uh heart attack or problems there I would be very very chary about giving her some hormonal therapy and if she wanted hormonal therapy I would probably give it through the skin or some other means   rather than through the gut and the mouth and the liver.

Tony: Mm now um th they're the some of the positives negatives.

Barry: Negatives hormonal therapy if it's given in an inappropriate way can produce uh things like bloating it can produce some breakthrough bleeding if the uterus is still present. Can produce some breast discomfort that's mastalgia because of the changes to the breast   um they're the basic things which most women will have as an adverse effect and there are some local things uh sometimes taking it by mouth will produce some nausea uh a few problems like that. If you take it through the skin it'll produce some skin irritation. Are suh uh some adverse change but we can always readjust those hitches to suit each particular patient.
 
Tony: Mm I suppose where we are moving into areas where we're we're not certain and that is the length of uh treatment for hormone replacement therapy   uh because it's a relatively new therapy um I suppose we're we're s stepping off the cliff cliff to a degree.

Barry: Oh uh can I correct you on this Tony it's not relatively new it started in nineteen-thirty-two so it's over seventy years of use of hormonal replacement therapy now. We have a lot of experience with it's use  and um there are now very long m major studies where women have been taking well over thirty years and have a very good outcome from that uh period of time. Matter of fact back in July of two-thousand-and-two when all this   first of the uh major negative studies came out my phone rang hot from patients ringing in   and one patient rang in I just couldn't remember her her history very well but I asked her how long she'd been taking therapy. And she said thirty-six years and I said how do you feel she said great I'm the semi finals of the club championship but I wanna keep on going . Now y'know th ah that's one swallow doesn't make a summer but the big thing is that women can take it while ever they wish to. They need to be monitored the whole time though.

Tony: Mm okay so I mean what six monthly or yearly or.

Barry: I generally see a patient every year when she's on hormonal therapy I probably see her twice in the first year when she starts on treatment to make sure everything's fine. But after that once every year from that point onwards.

Tony: Mm breast cancer is that an issue.

Barry: Yes breast cancer is there's there's no doubt that um women who have breast cancer uh l let me just sort of uh go back one step. It takes a long time for a single cell which has undergone an a series in mutations to eventually grow into a mass that we can actually see or feel. Some people have estimated it may take up fifteen years. If a woman is taking hormonal therapy whilst that uh cancer is growing it'll grow faster and it will show up earlier. This may be a negative or it may be a positive for her   but there's no doubt that women who have cancer probably shouldn't be taking oestrogen.

Tony: Mm it is a matter of fact that as women grow older the percentage of women likely to get breast cancer increases.

Barry: Oh yes it's an age related disease. At the age of fifty there's about one in a hundred women will have breast cancer and it doubles itself virtually every decade from there on so at the age of ninety it's around about fifteen per hundred women will be found to have breast cancer. So it just keeps on increasing every decade.

Tony: Mm is there any connection between breast cancer and hormone replacement therapy.

Barry: Well yeah there is I mean um men get breast cancer at about wuh only one uh man for every hundred women so it's a basically it's a female dominated uh type cancer but that relates to the number of times that the cells are multiplying in what are relatively large breasts compared to a male's breast. So we have a a problem of size and the number of cells which are present   but cancer is a series of mutations and the they're a sporadic spontaneous and sequential mutations which take place within cells anywhere in our body including the breast and hormones increase the rate that those cells are undergoing mutations but don't cause the mutations.

Tony: Mm Barry when uh when you're seeking advice on menopause should you consult your local G P or should you find yourself a specialist in hormone therapy.

Barry: Oh I think the majority of G Ps are fairly well uh aware of the menopause itself. What worries the general practitioner at present is the fear of making a mistake . Of not doing the right thing.

Tony: Can be very expensive these days.

Barry: Right yeah it's a it's a terrible thought and the majority or general practitioners are fighting shy of it right now because of all the publicity. The majority of general practitioners don't get a chance to read all the uh fine detail which I have to spend time reading or some of my colleagues have to spend time reading. So they're not always up to date with all the information but rather than give a negative point of view to a patient they'll give s often no point of view at all they wih they will often say to the patient don't take it uh and it's a negative one without knowing all the facts.

Tony: Alternative therapies uh I mean how do you feel about them and uh I I know you were saying during the news that you wouldn't personally uh prescribe that for anyone. Ah but you you don't feel opposed to to .

Barry: No I I have no opposition to um alternative therapies uh because most of them uh wuh all the research which has been done on them show that they don't have any major effect whatsoever. However if a patient or a doctor believes that they're going to help them   uh from a e m a from a placebo point of view they can be very very helpful they can have people believe that they're helping and that's very good and if people believe in something I think that's there's a great help to that. What distresses me is that sometimes people take them for the wrong reason uh with the wrong expectation. Uh obviously um most of these alternative therapies will not help things like osteoporosis or prevent a heart attack or   do something like that but they won't cause breast cancer and they won't cause some of the other diseases which may be um associated with hormonal therapy.

Tony: Mm menopause is uh as we've said earlier a difficult time for the person going through it but it can also be quite a difficult time for partners and for uh for friends as well.

Barry: Oh yes.
 
Tony: Um is there anything people can do to uh sort of ease ease that particular time because uh y'know obviously um a person going through this period ih thi they are a bit racked and uh and uh can pass on that uh   unpleasantness to others.

Barry: You you're right I mean but knowledge is power knowledge is everything so I believe that both men and women partners uh people who have any experience their children   should all try and learn as much as they can about the problems associated with the menopause so they can help uh the person who's suffering from the problems understand it or take care of them or advise them in some way. And in a way I mean I'm not trying to uh say go and buy my book but uh what I'm trying to say in my the book which I've just written. I'm trying to give information to women and anybody else who cares to read it exactly what is happening what it all means and I think it's important to gain that insight and that information.

Tony: Mm I mean would it benefit some women to get some psychological help sometimes if they if they feel that they've been impacted greatly by the by the change.

Barry: I I think that um the menopause doesn't produce psychiatric disturbance let me say that  uh m changes to a person's body can accentuate an underlying problem. Now if the woman uh who in question does have an underlying psychiatric problem which is accentuated then it may help her to see some psychological or psychiatric help but basically   it's in the hands of the general practitioner who looks at the total picture sees the patient and tries to decide exactly what areas of help are needed for that particular patient.

Tony: Mm how much fine tuning goes on with the uh y'know getting it right for the patient so that uh obviously you c you can't uh y'know uh one cap fit fits all uh y'know you you require some s s some tinkering at the edges.

Barry: Yeah it's uh look it's very important. I give every patient something like uh about half an hour to an hour to try and find out what uh what the patient feels like what's bothering them and so on like that. And in trying to decide on the type of therapy I take into account their background their physical ah situation other things which may be affecting them. In the hope that in some way uh I can get the therapy regimen right for them. Uh and a lotta doctors do exactly the same but time is the big constraint for this and when you're trying to decide on um a type of treatment sometimes it's much easier for a doctor just to pluck something off the shelf and if that doesn't work say ah well it's not going to work. That's an unfortunate way of doing it . But I always believe in getting a second opinion for all these issues.

Tony: Yeah so quite often uh the first treatment won't be the last treatment.

Barry: It's uh sometimes I've changed my treatment I was looking at a patient I saw today who's been with me for over twenty years and we've changed her treatment six times during that particular twenty years but each time things have got better for her and she's been reasonably happy at this stage.

Tony: Mm uh the book is called Understanding Menopause and Hormonal Therapy A woman's guide Dr Barry Wren is my guest tonight. I'm just wondering whether uh you've got some questions that you would like to put um it it is a very difficult uh area and um I I guess a lotta people don't fully understand exactly w what they're getting s themselves in for when it does happen. Uh and uh perhaps uh you as uh as a husband or friend would also like to ask a question maybe you're going through a difficult time as your partner   is uh is taking on the challenge of the change.
