Kerry: Ok Daniel I might get you to just tell me what you miss most about France?

Daniel: What I miss most about France?

Kerry: Yeah since you’ve been away

Daniel: Partly the food even if in Australia the food is not so bad. Before I was in USA and USA was awful to find good coffee very good bread and finding good cheese which is I think very French but ah I need that.

Kerry: Yeah yup. Have you found good cheese in Australia?

Daniel: Yeah from Tasmania I found pretty good cheese. Yeah so perhaps I miss my friends more than the food. I mean it’s so far away and I have nobody to talk with sometimes.

Kerry: What do you think has been the most difficult part about living in Australia in particular? What do you find difficult?

Daniel: I don’t know ah life is pretty easy people are very open, which is very nice. What I noticed was perhaps the lack of culture because I’ve been traveling. For example in South America it was very strong even if it’s a catholic culture in a way. I find people are very different from what I know being French.

Kerry: Okay.

Daniel: Yes so it was very rich very interesting. Australia and New Zealand are English culture so it’s not so different for me. I find that people here are more creative than the French for example. 

Kerry: How so?

Daniel: They are more free to do whatever they want which is very interesting but what I miss is culture er it’s pretty hard to explain. For example I’ve been spending time in Morocco which was amazing for me because it was very strong and very rich. I found it was pretty difficult to leave and stay all the time here

Kerry: How would you describe a typical Australian? maybe you could describe that to Beth and Beth can see if she agrees with you on that?

Beth: yeah.

Kerry: Because I’m actually not Australian.

Beth: It’s funny someone asked one of my students yesterday, she’s from Japan, said she wanted to send a present home to her father and she came to me and she said "what’s something typically Australian that I could send home?” and I thought “oh a kangaroo". But I was trying to think of something and um someone later in the day came up with wine. A good Australian wine. I found yesterday just thinking about it that it is hard to think of something typically Australian.

Kerry: It might be easier for an outsider.

Beth: Yeah I think so.

Daniel: I know it’s not easy I don’t know. For me they’re very easy going very open people not so stressful as in France they take time to live and they have a lot of friends and they’re pretty relaxed.

Beth: I’d agree we’re sort of relaxed.

Daniel: Laid-back and yeah I don’t know.

Beth: Pretty open.

Daniel: Yah.

Kerry: So they’re the main differences between the French and the Australians?

Daniel: Except the language for sure perhaps.

Kerry: Have you been to France?

Beth: I haven’t I wish I had but yeah from what I’ve heard I mean French people have a reputation for being a bit closed.

Daniel: Perhaps English people created this culture because they have always been fighting. I mean if you look at at the history of the French the English have always been fighting us. For an English speaking person who goes to France and who doesn’t try to speak French I think we are pretty rude which is a shame. 

Kerry: What would be a typical French person do you think?

Daniel: What’s a typical French person?

Beth: From what I hear aren’t Parisians quite different than other French people?

Daniel: It's a cultural thing. Yeah it’s a cultural, the north and south are very different. More relaxed perhaps in the south a bit more more open I think than Paris. Living in Paris is very multipurpose like all the big towns everybody’s stressful it’s very hard I think even if it’s a very nice town people are very stressful there and maybe for me who is coming from the south once I went there and I had time I was relaxed and just walking on the street and watching the buildings architecture, sorry for my English, people just stop me and say “where are you from you’re not from here?” because I was smiling to people.

K: Yeah it’s interesting they say that the French don’t smile so easily at people they don’t know. I’ve just been reading a book about the difference between the French and Americans and Americans sort of smile at anything that moves.

Beth: Yah they do.

Kerry: The French always find that a bit you know a bit over the top I suppose but they’re the complete opposite.

Daniel: I don’t know about the Americans but about French yeah.

Kerry: Yeah why do you think that is? Why don’t you smile at people because I think maybe even the Australians smile at people more easily.

Daniel: I suppose it depends on my mood but I’m pretty moody so in the morning if I have no coffee and no cigarettes I don’t smile.

Beth: Fair enough.

Kerry: It's okay. It's hard to provide a definition of who you are.

Daniel: We’re supposed to be very arrogant

Kerry:  Why do you have that reputation?

Daniel: I don’t know but in my case because my English is not good enough so when I’ll try to do to say things um perhaps I can sound a bit rude because I don’t know English very well. People find I’m arrogant too because I have trouble with my way of working or being. English people their way of eating things. You’ve got morning tea where you stop for 10 minutes, you have a sandwich lunch where you stop for 10 minutes, you have a sandwich at 4 o’clock and after you have a cooked lunch at night. I’m not used to stopping in the morning but I stop for at least one hour for lunch. It's very important to me. It comes across as rude.
