Catherine: Hello.

Fiona: Hi, Catherine.

Catherine: Thank you very much for coming and doing an interview
with us today. Could I just ask you to start by introducing
yourself, please?

Fiona: Certainly. I’m Fiona Doloughan and I’m a lecturer in
English at the University of Surrey.

Catherine: And we’d like to talk to you specifically about your
creative writing that you do in your own personal time away
from the university. Could you perhaps just say a little bit
about that please, and how you started with your creative
writing?

Fiona:  Certainly. I’ve been writing actually for a very, very
long time. I suppose like most would-be writers I started out
writing in my teen years and when I look back at what I
produced then I’m horrified. But I kept going through my
undergraduate and postgraduate years. I guess it’s really only
in about the last 10 to 15 years that I’ve begun to take my
writing a little bit more seriously in the sense that I see it
as part of what I do professionally as well as personally, and
so I’ve started trying to develop more of a profile.

Catherine: What kinds of things do you write about? Is it —
first of all in terms of genre, is it poetry or fiction or —
and what kinds of topics do you write about?

Fiona:  Mainly poetry, though I did go through a phase when I
was actually writing short stories. So probably at the turn of
the century I actually went on a creative writing course
residential week at Trenoweth in North Wales and I took a
creative writing course with Ali Smith and Jackie Kay and that
course was actually on short fiction and I spent quite a lot of
time working on short fiction, even getting as far as producing
a little book with draft short stories called "The farmer only
eats what he knows". And then I put that away in a drawer and I
have left that since that time. I think in the process of
drafting the short stories I realised that the short story
might not necessarily be my preferred genre. I will at some
point in the future come back to that because I think I’ve
learnt a lot more in the intervening years and it might be nice
to go back and work on those. But essentially since then I’ve
been working pretty much full-time on trying to write poetry.

Fiona:  In terms of what I write about, I suppose they’re
different categories. Even though I like to think of myself as
a kind of an urban girl, I do tend to write a lot of nature
poems but I guess nature for me isn’t just about the physical
environment but is also a way of talking about inner states and
psychologies and moods. So quite a lot of my pieces are mood
pieces and pieces about the rural landscape. I’m very, very
interested in the connection between the visual and the verbal
and I’m interested in how writers are able to trigger visual
effects through language. So that’s one of the reasons that I
keep coming back to this. And in fact even though the
visual-verbal intersection is one of the things that I work a
great deal on, more recently I’ve become very interested in
other dimensions of writing. So for me, I’m very interested in
exploring the different kind of modes and senses, how we
experience the world in a kind of 3D fashion. So I’m interested
in sounds and how we kind of experience the world in all its
kind of sensory dimensions. So more recently in a poem in which
I’m kind of running along a country road, looking to left and
right, and trying to evoke the visuality of what I see, I’m
also trying to think of ways of evoking the soundscape through
the language. And I think this probably relates to my academic
interest in multimodality as well  cos  I’m interested in
language itself as being multimodal and particularly with
poetry, you’ve got rhythms, you’ve got cadence, you’ve got
rhyme schemes potentially, you’ve got possibilities of evoking
visual scenarios, possibilities of evoking sounds and so it’s
very multimodal.


Catherine: What do you — You talk there about visual and sounds.
Is that what ‘multimodal’ means?

Fiona:  For me ‘multimodal’ just means, at a very simplistic
level, many modes. So we can use an oral mode or a written mode
or a visual mode, but we can also use language itself to try to
trigger in readers particular types of reactions and a
particular sensory experience. So in relation to poetry — of
course, you can do this in a concrete sense and you can do it
in a slightly more implicit sense. By concrete sense I mean you
can actually have a poem which is laid out in a visual fashion
such that the form of the poem reflects the substance of what
you’re talking about. And I’ve played around with that as well
in terms of colour schemes which highlight different aspects,
and I’ve laid out poems on the page a little bit like poets
such as Apollinaire. So I’m interested in both concretely
playing around with the materiality of poetry, but I’m also
interested then in how language itself can actually trigger a
different, well, a variety of sensory experiences in the reader
and how the writer can achieve that. […]

Catherine: The creative writing degrees have really sprung up
over the last 10 years or so I  s’pose  in the UK, do you think
that creative writing is something that can actually be taught
and assessed, or can be learnt by a student? What is — are your
feelings on that?

Fiona:  I mean, this is very much a topic of the moment given,
as you say, the rise in creative writing programmes across the
country and what seems to be an exponential increase in student
interest. I mean, programmes are filling up left, right and
centre. I mean, I think because of where I come from in terms
of my kind of academic background and interests, I do believe
that writing is something that people can get better at and
that it’s a craft and a skill, not in a superficial way but in
a kind of deep way which — I mean, it’s a very complicated
process, but I think if you break that process down and you
give people the resources that they need to try to take their
writing forward, that they are actually able to improve. And
that’s at all levels. So, for example, I think, while it may be
controversial, I think it’s actually quite important for
students of creative writing in a narrow sense, i.e. perhaps of
fiction, poetry, drama, even potentially screenwriting, to be
people who actually understand how language works because if
you’re going to try to achieve stylistic effects, you need to
understand the tools, the materiality of language and how that
can be manipulated in order to try to achieve those effects. So
I think that’s absolutely crucial. […]

Catherine: Do you do anything to try and take your skills in
your own writing forward in a more formalised way?

Fiona:  Absolutely. I think I mentioned already that I did in
the past attend a creative writing residential course at
Trenoweth in North Wales and in fact I’ve been there 3 times,
most recently in the summer. I was fortunate enough to be
selected to do a poetry masterclass with Carol-Ann Duffy and
Gillian Clarke. As you know, Carol-Ann is the Poet Laureate and
Gillian is the National Poet for Wales. And I spent a wonderful
week in the company of serious, dedicated poets and, like
myself, would-be poets. We sat through workshops, we did
exercises, we were given feedback on what we produced. We
worked on drafts, we redrafted what we had written, we got
feedback from one another, which was extremely invaluable, and
indeed feedback from the tutors in individual tutorials, and I
think as a result of that week in North Wales I have definitely
improved by leaps and bounds in what I’ve been able to produce.
And I think that’s borne out by a fellow poet who has actually
been kind enough to offer me feedback on a little volume that
I’m currently trying to put together called "Transformations"
and she was actually extremely encouraging so in the next year
I’m going to work towards putting a volume of poetry
together. Hopefully I can get a publisher for this.

Getting your work published
---------------------------

Catherine: Is it quite difficult to get poetry published? Or any
work of creative writing published?

Fiona: I mean it’s a — that’s a tricky question to answer in the
sense that, now more than ever, there are so many different
outlets for publication. Obviously a lot of people will publish
their poetry on the web either in their own spaces, whether it
be MySpace or in Facebooks or whether they are members of
groups and organisations which will actually publish online.
Desktop publishing is increasingly important. Print on demand,
and suchlike. But I think there’s still perhaps a residual
desire to have your work published by a commercial publisher.

Catherine: It’s almost a status thing, isn’t it?

Fiona: It is. It is, in effect.

Catherine: That even though all these things’re available to
you, it still seems like the pinnacle to think that somebody
thinks you’re worth — your work is worth publishing and  yeah
.

Fiona:  Absolutely. No, I couldn’t agree more. I mean, in some
ways it should be enough to have an audience, to have your work
out there, but somehow that appears to lack the validation or
the institutional stamp that comes from having your work
reviewed and assessed by peers or communities where they have a
lot of experience of particular genres. So that’s my hope.

Fiona: I actually have self-published pieces of work in the
past, little volumes just for family and friends and — because
for me it was a nice kind of way of putting closure on some of
the pieces that I’d done and I wanted I suppose to let some of
my friends and family know that this was actually part of my
identity and who I think I am. But maybe it’s a question partly
of increasing confidence and partly of increasing knowledge
about the poetry world and actually getting encouraging
feedback from published poets that I’ve decided that I want to
give myself the opportunity of trying to publish perhaps with a
small press. There are many small presses where at least there
is the possibility of getting your work — getting a fair
reading of your work. I’ve managed to make contacts now with
people in the poetry world, which of course is essential in —
just like in academic circles, you need to go to conferences,
you need to get your ideas out there, you send your papers to
people who will read them and review them, and therefore at
some level when they get something across their desks, they
already have a sense of who the person is, what they’re about
and how much experience or knowledge of a thing they have. You
know, I’ve always sent things out to competitions, but it’s a
bit like winning the lottery, but we’ll continue with that. But
yes, the next venture is to try to find a publisher for a small
volume.

Catherine: And what’s that small volume about?

Fiona: It’s called ‘Transformations’ and I guess the title is
trying to reflect on — You were asking earlier about the
different themes, topic areas, poetic material that I tend to
investigate and I thought that ‘Transformations’ would actually
encapsulate the different aspects of what I try to do. So, for
example, I mean I’ve talked about the visual and the verbal
which is a kind of transformation but I’m also very interested
in how, for example, you can read something in a newspaper and
it will trigger an idea for a poem and for me that is a kind of
transformation because you’ve got a pre-existing text which you
respond to at whatever level. It could be comic, it could be
serious, and then that provides the material or stimulus for
writing in a different genre. And so in the summer one of the
things that I responded to, and this is not a poem that is
finished yet because it needs redrafting, it needs working on,
but just to give you an idea of the transformation, there was a
little article in ‘The Guardian’ about Chirac’s dog and it was
extremely amusing because it talked about Chirac having to
leave the Elysée Palace after his term as President had ended
and his little dog suffered from a bit of a trauma after living
it up, after the high life in the Elysée Palace. And I just
thought this was a wonderful little scenario for a poem written
from the perspective of the dog. So I put together a little poem
about Chirac’s dog. […]

Catherine: I’m getting a sense during this interview that
creative writing is very central and core to your own identity
and what you do. Could you just talk a little bit about your
background in Northern Ireland just to wrap up the interview?

Fiona: Yes, certainly.

Catherine: Where you come from and what it’s like there perhaps?

Fiona:  Yes, well, I was born in Newtownards in Northern Ireland
and grew up in Belfast for the first 7 years and then, because
of my father’s job, we moved to a country market town in County
Antrim called Ballymena and I lived there essentially until I
was 18 and then I went away to university in England. So I’ve
spent 19 years in total in Northern Ireland  cos  I did do a
Postgraduate Certification in Education back in Northern
Ireland, so 19 years of my life have been spent there.

Catherine: Would you say that that has any impact on your own
sense of identity now, or …?

Fiona:  Yes, I think it certainly does. I think that there is a
kind of culture in Northern Ireland which privileges or values
good storytelling, which values the arts, which values an
ability to play with language and I think that I have in a
sense imbibed that from the culture. So even, you know, within
my own family and, you know, I come from a background where,
you know, now I guess my family you would say is middle class
but I basically have fairly working class origins if you go
back a couple of generations. But there’s always been,
regardless of degree of education, there’s always been this
curiosity about the world, this interest in language, in other
cultures, in other peoples and in looking at the world through
a fairly broad lens. I mean, I think my grandfather on my
mother’s side had a really — he had a bigger influence on me
than he knew because, even though he left school at the age of
14 and was an apprentice baker so he didn’t have much formal
education, he was always supremely interested in Irish history,
in literature, and he used to in his later years have in his
pocket a little hipflask of whisky in one pocket and in the
other some stories, well, the sonnets of Shakespeare and
stories of Maud Gonne. So he was someone for me who became a
kind of almost a romantic figure, so this desire to kind of
learn to value your heritage I think is actually quite
important and I think for me as someone who comes from Northern
Ireland, even though I left at a relatively young age, I have
carried with me always certain values, shall we say, and a
certain sense of, I don’t know, — a bit like Joyce at the end
of ‘A Portrait of the Artist’ basically going out into the
world and making something of yourself and carrying your
heritage with you and using that at some level as a kind of
source material. It doesn’t have to be — correspond one-to-one
and your material doesn’t have to relate directly to Ireland,
although I have written some stories set in Ireland and some of
my poems draw on experience of being a child in Northern Ireland
but nevertheless this fascination with language, with
playfulness, with creating your own little world, but also
having a kind of fairly strong sense of where you come from, of
your own identity and I think that’s really important.
