Fionnan:
My name is Fionnan Nester. I'm from Mayo, which is over in the
west of Ireland. My parents are both teachers, most of my
family are teachers actually. I've 3 brothers and 2 sisters. So
I went to college in Galway and I studied French and Italian for
4 years. I was never really that good at French, to be honest,
but I was quite good at Italian and I picked it up kind of
quickly, so I spent a year in Italy studying Italian, which is
great, in Verona. And then I came back and I finished my
degree. I went on to do a Masters in Italian Translating and
then I went on to become a teacher of French and Italian. But
to be honest, there weren't that many jobs going at the time.
So I got a job in a Tourist Office in Galway for summer. And I
loved it. I love working with people, talking to them, meeting
them, you know, helping them. People there, all of us were
making kind of a good contribution to the community by helping
tourists coming in and what not. So then I stayed there for a
couple of years and became an Executive Assistant then to the
Director of Marketing for Failte Ireland for the company within
my work now. And then about 16 months ago, I became the Product
Development Officer for Equestrian Tourism and English as a
Foreign Language for my company, which is Failte Ireland.

Valerie:

Great. And what is Failte Ireland?

Fionnan:
Failte Ireland is Ireland's national tourism development
authority. I know it's a bit of mouthful, but what it is, uh we
are State-funded and our job really is the promotion of tourism
in Ireland, in the Republic of Ireland to people in the
Republic of Ireland. It's a development authority also, not
only that we market tourism to tourists in Ireland, we also
invest money in tourism businesses on the ground. We provide
training and development and we provide a visitor servicing to
training and development for those tourism business, for
hotels, for equestrian centres, for English Language Schools,
whatever it is. That's tailored to their needs, specific to
that sector. We also have a visitor servicing section, which is
like the Tourist Office Network, I think there're maybe 60 or 70
Tourist Offices around the country and we'd manage those as
well. So it's quite a wide ranging, a broad remit really, but
that's basically what we are in a nutshell.

Valerie:
Great. And what is your role in the organisation?

Fionnan:
Well I'd be the representative for Equestrian Tourism and
English as a Foreign Language. So how it works in here is we
have lots of different activities available to tourists. So
whether it be walking, cycling, watersports, angling,
festivals, cultural heritage. Each of those products we call
them, or activities, that tourists would engage in, each of
those products has a representative in Failte Ireland, like
myself for Equestrian and English as a Foreign Language. So
it'll be my job to promote those products overseas in the
appropriate markets, and here it'll be my job to invest in
those businesses on the ground if they needed particular
developments or upskilling or what not. And training and
development for those areas as well, so I would provide
tailored training development for them. And then marketing of
those businesses in Ireland. Now English as a Foreign Language
obviously I wouldn't be marketing that in Ireland, but
Equestrian Tourism we would be marketing that to Irish people.

Valerie:
Right. You would never, I mean, myself I would never associate
English as a Foreign Language with tourism. So how do you do
the marketing?

Fionnan:
Well, to be honest, I think it's absolutely a tourism product.
Well first of all, it brings in about 116 thousand of students
every year, which is an enormous figure, huge. That was from a
survey we carried out last year. So that's 116 thousand
students. And the contribution they made to the economy was in
the region of 254 million euro. So that's massive, and that's
direct spent, so that'd be what the students spend on tuition,
accommodation, food, but there's a knock-on effect then,
there's a knock-on spend. And then, I suppose what makes it,
what draws it into the tourism sphere would be the fact that
their parents come over, the students' parents come over, the
students' family come over. Those students themselves travel
around the world, after they finish their courses here and God
willing if we've done a good job here on the ground, they'll
tell the world about the place. So these people are future
tourists themselves and their children are future tourists, and
their families are future tourists. So that's really why we talk
about EFL as a tourism product. And not only that, but English
as a Foreign Language isn't just about learning English in
school, it's about travelling to visitor attractions, it's
about learning about Irish culture, it's about going to the
Cliffs of Moher, taking bus tours. So these people are far more
valuable in my opinion, far more valuable to Irish economy than
a tourist who spends a week here because that tourist who
spends one week here would do the bus tour, they'll do go to
dinner and what not, but the student would spend an average of
4 weeks here and they'll spend maybe a little bit less but over
the 4 weeks they'll spend more than the normal tourists let's
say. So yeah, it's a tourism product, that's how we see it, and
that's how we promote it.

Valerie:

Wow, that's amazing. And where are the students from?

Fionnan: Well the majority of them are coming from mainland
Europe, so I think we found that 84% in total come from Italy,
Spain and France in that order of priority let's say. So it's
84% coming from Italy, Spain and France. Then outside of
Europe, the other markets would be, this'll be kind of
long-haul destinations, places like Taiwan, Korea, Japan,
Brazil, Russia is becoming a big market now, China was a big
market but it's less so now. So these are the kind of markets
we're looking at, these are long-haul markets now. The thing is
that there're only 16% of students that come here come from
long-haul destinations like those I just mentioned. They stay
for an awful lot longer. So whereas your French student would
come and spend 3 or 4 weeks during the summer, your Brazilian
student would come and spend the whole year here. So though
there're less of them, they're far more valuable to the
economy, so.

Valerie: Right. And once they come to Ireland, are they kind of
put like say in greater Dublin area or all over Ireland?

Fionnan: Well they're put all over Ireland, yeah absolutely, but
there's about 110 or so approved schools in the country, these
English Language Schools, and they're approved by the
Department of Education. So these are the schools that we can
stand over and we can guarantee their quality and their
standard of education that's provided in them. But though most
of the schools, most of those 110 schools are located in
Dublin, maybe 70 of them, the remaining are scattered all over
the country, Galway, Cork, Limerick, out in the countryside,
all over really. So yeah, but you're right, the majority of
them are in Dublin, but that's simply because you have clusters
of schools, you have direct access to Dublin Airport, and of
course it's Ireland's largest city, so it tends to be a lot
more happening around the city than it would be in Mayo or
Kerry, you know.

Valerie: Yeah. And would summer be the high season?

Fionnan: Yeah, so coming June, July, August is the high season,
that's when you get those French, Italian and Spanish students.
You see them all over the city. I'm sure you see them yourself,
there's throngs of them everywhere, it's great.

Valerie: I find it quite interesting, I mean I used to live in
Dublin for a year, and this time I come up and it's kind of on
the street majority I can see are probably foreigners during
the summer time. And I think Irish people, you know, reverse
the trend, they go overseas for holidays.

Fionnan:
Yeah, it's gas really. Though you know that's changing now, I
suppose Irish people aren't going abroad as much now. But
you're absolutely right. The city is absolutely, cause you're
talking 116 thousand students, maybe 60 thousand of them come
during the summer, and then so Dublin city for example and
Galway and Cork, they're all packed with Spanish and Italian
students. So it's brilliant for the local economy, it's
brilliant just for the atmosphere around the cities as well,
you know, it's great to have these students knocking around,
buying things, and going on tours. And I think a really
important aspect to the summers in Ireland is having these
foreign students here.

Valerie:

Yes, yes. So how important is the tourism industry in Ireland?

Fionnan: Well the tourism industry in Ireland is extremely
important, it's massive. But of course it's under threat now as
you can imagine. There's less people travelling internationally
what not. But I'll give you some figures. In 2008 there was
seven and a half million people, that seven and a half million
people came to Ireland from overseas as tourists. Now think the
population of Ireland is only 4.2 / 4.3 million, that's
enormous, you're almost talking double the population of
Ireland travelling into the country as tourists. So that's 7.5
million people. That's down though. That's down about 3% on the
year before, and I'd say this year again 2009 it's going to be
down another 3% maybe this year again. And next year then
people would hope that in 2010 it'll stabilise a little bit and
we can look forward to it increasing again. So but yes, it's
extremely important. At the moment, I think, there could be
over 250 thousand people, at least there was at the end of last
year, maybe 250 thousand people employed in tourism in the
country, which is just enormous, employed in hotels, B&B's,
guesthouses, equestrian centres, adventure centres, so yeah,
it's extremely important. And it pumps in 6.3 billion euro to
Irish economy every year, so it's extremely important, yeah.

Valerie: Right. So that 7.8 million doesn't include immigrants?

Fionnan: It doesn't. No it includes people travelling into the
country on short stay tourist visits.

Valerie: Wow, that's amazing. I never knew that yeah.

Fionnan: Enormous, yeah. So you can imagine those people are
coming during the summer months as well. So I think it's a
phenomenal figure. So though I suppose tourism is dropping,
Ireland has definitely been punching above its weight really
when it comes to international tourists. So I think, I don't
have the figures actually, I had them a month ago, I haven't
got them with me, but we're definitely punching above our
weight for a country our size and population, we're generating
an enormous amount of revenue from tourism. Like I said it's
almost double the population.

Valerie: Yeah, but 3% that sounds nothing.

Fionnan:
Sounds minimal, I suppose it sounds minimal enough, but again if
you look at another 3% this year, maybe even 4, that's 7%,
that'll really take its toll on tourism in the country, I mean,
already it was performing well, but there's still a lot, there's
an over abundance of hotels out there anyway, they were built
during the economic boom, they put extra pressure on Bed and
Breakfast, there was a price battle between B&B's and hotels.
So the hotels were winning, they're charging the same price as
the B&B's, So B&B's were under an awful lot of pressure to get
business. So if you take another 3% away, and then another 3 or
4%, 7% down that's leaving it extremely difficult for a lot of
hotels and B&B's, accommodation provided mainly to do business.
And bus tours have suffered hugely this year. There aren't those
large groups coming into the country on organised tours, and
that really has serious impacts on visitor attractions, you
know, like Cliffs of Moher or Gledalough or Wicklow or so.

