Colm:  Colm Browne is my name. I'm from Portlaoise in County
Laois. Portlaoise is a town of about 12,000 people. It's about
50 miles from Dublin, about an hour from Dublin Airport when
you're driving. It's southwest of Dublin. And I've lived there
almost all my life. It's a nice town. It's a mixture I suppose
of town living and country living. We have country very close
by us in Portlaoise. Most people in Ireland and some people
from abroad would know Portlaoise very well for its prison,
very very big prison there. We have, well there are 2 prisons
now in fact, there used to be just one, it housed the
paramilitary prisoners during the Northern Ireland troubles but
we have another prison beside it. But that's one thing that it
would be very famous for.

Valerie: And what was it like to grow up in Portlaoise?

Colm: Ah it was great. It was lovely. I think it had the
benefits of town living that we had a lot of amenities,
sporting and cultural amenities, and at the same time we have
the benefits of living very close to the country. So we're very
close to rivers and mountains. And I spent many many days when I
was young up in the Slieve Bloom Mountains which are very very
close, very famous range of mountains. -----Now they're very
small compared to mountains in other countries like the Alps
and the Pyrenees but they were very big to us when we were
young. And the Laois / Offaly people, Laois and Offaly are 2
counties that are side by side and the Slieve Blooms would have
very great significance for people who live in both counties.
The county is a very flat county, but Laois and Offaly they're
sort of neighbouring counties. And both of them are very flat,
and there's a lot of bog, so the Slieve Blooms presents a real
contrast to that flat land. And so for that reason I think
people like to get away from that and get up to the mountains
yeah.

Valerie: And what do you do in the mountains, hiking?

Colm: Hill-walking.

Valerie:  And this Celtic Tiger, does it bring huge change to
your town and what is it like now to live there?

Colm: The Celtic Tiger, it did bring some change. I suppose
bulding was the most obvious. The town has expanded greatly
compared with when I was young. There're lots of estates in
town that I wouldn't even know the names of. They sprout so
quickly and I would see their names advertised, I'd see their
names in the local papers but I wouldn't necessarily know
exactly where they were or know the people who live in them. So
the Celtic Tiger brought a lot of people into Portlaoise because
there's a lot of building there, so there's a lot of work,
construction work there. And also the fact I think that it is
very close to Dublin Airport, so when people are looking at the
map of Ireland and they see Dublin and they land in Dublin
Airport, they see Portlaoise as a place they can get to quickly
and they can settle and it's not too far. Some people would've
come to Ireland and even people who live in Ireland and
wouldn't want to live in Dublin. It's very busy and it can be
an expensive place to live in.

Valerie: So they commute?

Colm:  They would see Portlaoise yes there's very good train
service between Portlaoise and Dublin and between Portarlington
and Dublin, which is very close on the line to Dublin as well. A
lot of people would've moved down to Portlaoise.

Valerie:  I see. You are a very keen sportsman.

Colm: Very keen sportsman, yes indeed. Irish people love sport,
all sorts of sport, rugby is very popular in Ireland, soccer is
popular, horse racing, greyhound racing would be very popular.
But the most popular games would be hurling and football,
that's Gaelic Football. They are termed, they're called Gaelic
Games. They are run by the Gaelic Athletic Association and
they're the native games of Ireland. The Gaelic Athletic
Association is celebrating its 125th Anniversary this year. It
was founded in Thurles in County Tipperary in 1884. It's a very
strong organisation. It's as much a cultural and social if you
like organisation as it is a sporting organisation. And hurling
/ football would be very very popular games altogether. And they
would be played in all parts of the country.

Valerie: So it's kind of like a national game.

Colm: Yes, it's a national game and it's even played in Northern
Ireland. For administrative purposes Northern Ireland is
separate, it's part of the United Kingdom, it's separate from
the Republic of Ireland. The Gaelic Athletic Association has
clubs in all parts of Ireland, the whole island of Ireland.

Valerie: So in a sense it unite the island together.

Colm:  Yes, it's a 32-county game as is rugby as well, soccer
isn't but rugby is a 32-county game as well.

Valerie:  So, you're a footballer.

Colm: Football, football yes.

Valerie: Can you tell us how the game is played, the Gaelic
Football?

Colm: The game is, it's a mixture really of, the best way to
describe it, it's a mixture between rugby and soccer, it's not
quite as physical a game as rugby but it would be a little more
physical than soccer. The ball with which it's played is very
similar to a soccer ball, little bit smaller, little bit
heavier but it's very similar to a soccer ball. The ball is
transferred from player to player from the hand, kicking the
ball like a goalkeeper would kick in soccer or can be fisted
from player to player. Pitch would be approximately, it's a
good bit bigger now than the soccer pitch, it's approximately
137 metres long and approximately 85 metres wide, so it's a big
pitch. There're 15 players on each team. We have goalkeeper, 6
defenders, 2 mid-fielders and 6 attackers. And there's no
off-side like rugby and soccer there's no off-side in Gaelic
Football or hurling. Hurling has the same number of players and
players are positioned in the same way as they would be for
Gaelic Football. The goals are very like rugby posts, you have
2 uprights and a cross bar. It's like an H, an English H, that
shape. The cross bar would be a little bit lower in Gaelic
Football than that is in rugby, a little bit lower. But the
posts would be a little bit wider than they are in rugby. And
there're 2 ways you can score, two types of scores in the take
in football and in hurling. One of them is called the point,
that's where you kick the ball between the uprights but over
the bar, and that's called a point. The other way to score is
what's called a goal, where you kick the ball beneath the cross
bar and between the uprights. And a goal is worth 3 points, so
you have to score 3 points to equal a goal. And games last at
club level, we have clubs and counties play football and
hurling. The clubs are based in local areas, specific small
geographic area. And the counties then represent the counties
of Ireland. And games at club level last for 30 minutes a side,
2 30-minute periods. And at inter-county level, which is like
the Premium League of Gaelic Football or the Bundas League of
Gaelic Football.

Valerie: The Championship, is it?

Colm: The Championship, yes, that's the All-Ireland , that's
right.

Valerie: The Championship is in August, isn't it?

Colm: Well in some part of Ireland it starts in May and the
climax of it starts in August and the finals are played in
September. Hurling Final is usually played in early September
and 2 weeks later then the All Ireland Football Final is played
in Croke Park.

Valerie: And there's a name for the cup, isn't there?

Colm: That's right, that's right, you have good knowledge of it.
For hurling the cup is called McCarthy Cup and for Gaelic
Football the cup is called the Sam Maguire Cup. You don't even
have to say The Sam Maguire Cup when you say the Sam Maguire
people know exactly what you're talking about

Valerie: Referring to the football.

Colm: Everybody knows what that means.

Valerie: And it's a very very important sport in Ireland because
the president of Ireland is always in the match presenting the
Trophy / the Cup.

Colm:  Yes, absolutely, the President is always attends the
All-Ireland Hurling Final and the All-Ireland Football Final.
But President also attends other championship matches through
out the year. I know that our President has a particular
interest in hurling and football, she's very very interested.

Valerie:  And you are an All-Star Award winner.

Colm: That's right.

Valerie: Can you tell us a little bit about that?

Colm: Many years ago I did yes, I won the All-Star Award. It's
an award that's given to the top 15 players in Ireland in any
year. Your county doesn't necessarily have to be very
successful. It's an individual award rather than a team award.
Back in a long time ago, back in the 80's.

Valerie: Is there like certain criterias when they're choosing
or is there a competition to win this award?

Colm: There isn't a competition as such but you're judged by a
panel of selectors usually journalists, panel of journalists,
and people who would've seen a lot of games throughout the year
and they vote on who they think is the best player in each
position for that year.

Valerie: I know the game, like say players, you're not paid,
it's an amateur organisation.

Colm: That's right. It's an amateur organisation but players
prepare and they play in a very professional way and county
players would train 4 to 5 times a week and would be very
conscious of what they eat and very conscious of what they
drink and prepare very very well for the championship games. So
even though they're not paid, they consider themselves as
professionals and they take the games very very seriously.

Valerie: Since it's not money driven, I mean what motivates
people to play for the county, especially like you said that
they have to watch what they eat, you know, in some sense, it's
sort of a sacrifice, isn't it? So what motivates people to play
for their county?

Colm: Well, it's interesting because players don't consider it a
sacrifice. They're conscious that they're making what people
would consider a sacrifice but they don't see it that way.
Players just love to play for their clubs. Clubs are based on a
small geographic area and players have great pride in that area.
It's their parish, what we call it, it's their home place, their
home parish. Players have great pride in their parish. Players
have great pride in their county as well. So a player is very
much of the people, they're not like professional sportspeople
where they are isolated, they train and they play sort of at a
distance from the people, from their neighbours and Gaelic
players don't. They work at the same job as other people would
and they live beside the same people who go and support them.
So they're very much part of the community and that community
pride drives a lot of what they do.

Valerie: And I know in Ireland, say when you are applying for a
job and if you are a GAA member for example somebody in the
company could be a member as well, it always makes it a bit
easier.

Colm: It does, it does, certainly it does. And I suppose the
qualities that would go to make a good hurler or footballer
would be the qualities that can apply in a job situation, like
discipline and determination and commitment and all of those
things. You have to have those as a player and they can be
useful to employers as well. Gaelic Game is a way by which
people can build a very high profile for themselves and that
could help in looking for work later on.

Valerie: So it's a good reference to have.

Colm: Very good, very very good, yes.

Valerie:  What's the importance of sports nowadays for young
people? I suppose passing on the tradition of that community
spirits and especially Irish games, it's very very important,
so in your view, what's the importance of the sports to young
people?

Colm: Well I think the modern day living especially in what was
Celtic Tiger Ireland, there was a lot of non-sporting
activities that youngsters would, games of all sorts. And I
think people recognise that that wasn't healthy for the young
people. And the great thing about the Irish society now is that
young people have a wide range of sports from which they can
choose. Years ago there wouldn't have been too many sports,
Gaelic Games for most people, but there was a time when if you
played Gaelic Game, you couldn't by rule play rugby or soccer.
But all of that is gone now and young people are encouraged to
play Gaelic games and other games and to play a mixture of all
games. So I think that's very important for them because the
physical activity is very important for young people. And apart
from it, apart from a physical development point of view, I
think it shows the benefits of commitment and dedication and
the benefits of team work as well. Sport, I think, is also
great to teach people how to get over disappointments because
if you are involved in the sports especially team sport you're
going to be disappointed. Sometimes you're going to win and
sometimes you are going to lose and whether you win or lose you
have to get up and go at it again and keep training and keep
committed. And I think team sports and sport in general teaches
people that as well, the physical benefits.

Valerie: So it's a great tool for developing their personality.

Colm:  Yes, I think so, team sport especially. I think most
people would encourage young people to get involved in any
sport but I think team sports have the extra benefits. They all
have benefits that individual sports have, but I think it has
the team work element that's great benefit to people

