
Deirdre: My name is Deirdre. I am 31 years old and I'm a primary
school teacher. I live in the west of Ireland in County Mayo. I
was raised in a village in the west of Ireland. There's about
300 people living in the village. I work in the local town
which is Castlebar town. The Castlebar town would have between
20 and 30 thousand people living in it. It's the county town
and the biggest town in the area. I'm a primary school teacher
based in the all girls primary school in the town, the Convent
Primary School. I teach in 30 different schools in the area.
I'm a permanent supply teacher.

Valerie:  How does the primary education system work in Ireland?


Deirdre: Primary school in Ireland is little bit different to
elsewhere in Europe. Kindergarten doesn't really exist in
Ireland. Younger children occasionally attend play school
before they come into the primary school system, but play
school isn't part of the national education system in Ireland.
Children can enter primary school at the age of 4 and they
usually stay in primary school until the age of 13. So there're
8 years of primary school in Ireland. At the first 2 years are
junior and senior infants, which would be something similar to
kindergarten in other countries. The 8 years are broken up into
4 units and all of the curriculum in Ireland is taught, it's
called spiral curriculum, so there's 4 different levels to each
curriculum, so each level corresponds to 2 years of primary
school. So you have junior and senior infants, first and second
class, third and fourth class and fifth and sixth class.

Valerie: Right. So 4 units.

Deirdre: So there's 4 units. So for example in the English
curriculum, there is a certain curriculum set out for junior
and senior infants to be covered over those 2 years. That's
expanded on then in first and second class over the next 2
years. So they're in units of 2 years, 4 units of 2 years in
primary school.

Valerie: Right. So they do say English but 4 different levels.

Deirdre: 4 different levels with 4 different sets of criteria
and 4 different sets of aims for those years. Primary school
teachers in Ireland teach all subjects in the primary school.
So each class has just one teacher. There're one teacher to
teach all of the subjects. Very occasionally some schools will
bring in specialists for short periods of time throughout the
year to help teachers in certain areas. Popular areas for
getting expert help into the primary school would be
occasionally in music. An extra music teacher might be brought
in for one lesson a week maybe for 6 weeks throughout the year
to help maybe with teaching an instrument or perhaps teaching
choir or something like that. Also in PE as well. Schools often
bring in experts for example in teaching gymnastics if the
teachers in the school aren't fairly confident in teaching
gymnastics, the school might bring in a specialist teacher to
help with the teaching of gymnastics and PE again for maybe 4
or 6 weeks. But for the most part teachers teach all of the
subjects. So they would include English and Irish. The last 2
years in primary school, fifth and sixth class, many schools
will also teach a European language in fifth and sixth class as
well. So in my school they teach French for the final 2 years in
school. History, geography and science, and maths of course,
art, music, drama, the usual school subjects, but also in the
majority of Irish primary schools, teachers must teach half an
hour of religious education everyday as well. That's because
originally going back more than 100 years ago, the education
system in Ireland was actually set up by religious orders. Nuns
and priests came and they established schools in areas in the
country where education wasn't available. They spread so that
in the early part of this century nearly all of the education
in Ireland was given by religious orders. So when the State
gained independence from England, the education system was
pretty much already there under religious orders. So the
government pretty much left it with the religious orders. The
government helped in the funding of it but they left the
running of the schools to religious orders. So even though now
in 2009 there are very few religious actually left in
education. The majority of Irish primary schools are Catholic
primary schools because they were set up originally by Catholic
orders. So if you teach in a Catholic primary school, it is part
of your contract to teach half an hour of religious education
everyday from 12 o'clock until half past twelve everyday in the
primary school. In recent years the demand has started for
different types of primary education, especially since the
other religions in Ireland are more popular now as well. So
Educate Together schools are a well-known group of schools that
are non-denominational. So we have non-denominational schools,
multi-denominational schools, Gaelscoileanna, which are schools
that teach fully through the medium of Irish language. And we
have special schools as well then for children with special
needs. So there's a greater choice of schools, but again those
newer schools aren't always available in every area. So in this
area, there is a choice of, for example, the local town, there
is an all girls convent primary school, which is Catholic.
There is an all boys primary school, which is a Catholic school
as well, Christian Brothers School and there is a Gaelscoil
which is for boys and girls and they teach fully through the
medium of Irish. But at the moment, there isn't the choice of a
multi-denominational or non-denominational school in the area.

Valerie: Right. You just mentioned that you travel between 30
schools, and do you have to teach all the subjects to those
schools or?

Deirdre:  Yeah, I would teach all of the subjects except for the
modern language in some schools. For example, if they're
teaching Italian or German, I don't have Italian or German, so
I'm limited in that area. So in the senior classes they're
entitled to one and a half hours every week of modern language
teaching, but again for example, if you're in a school that
teaches Italian, I might do Italian geography instead of the
Italian language, I might do something about the Italian
culture but again I'll be limited in being able to actually
teach the language.

Valerie:  And how does the curriculum consist of other than, you
know, you mentioned about all the subjects, like say the class
length, how many minutes and how is it organised, how many
classes you have a day and break and what time does the school
start and things like that?

Deirdre: ok. The Irish primary curriculum was revised in recent
years, so it has just been fully implemented now, they took
subject by subject over the last 10 years or so to implement
them into primary schools. So the newer revised curriculum is
now fully implemented in all primary schools in Ireland. So
that is a curriculum that was developed by the National
Department of Education, so that every school in the country is
required to teach, according to the guidelines in the new
revised curriculum. Depending on where you are in the country,
schools start at different times. In town or city areas, some
schools can start as early as half past eight in the morning.
In the country areas, they can start as late as half past nine
in the morning. That goes back to children helping on the farms
in the mornings and it was kind of traditional in country
schools that they would start later so that children would have
time to help with chores in the morning. Again depending on when
you start, the finishing times would be different. The school
that I am based in starts school at nine o'clock in the morning
and they finish at two forty in the afternoon. There is one
10-minute break from ten fifty to eleven o'clock and then there
is half an hour for the children to have lunch, that's from half
past twelve until one o'clock. So for the first 10 minutes of
that break, the teachers are supervising the children having
their lunch when they go out to lunch then most of the teachers
are free to have lunch themselves, so the teachers only get
20-minute lunch break really. And there's yard-supervision so
there's a rota in the schools so that teachers can supervise on
the yard. The timetable in the school is down to each school and
each teacher how exactly they wish to timetable their day. The
National Curriculum does outline how much time is to spend
teaching every subject every week. So that is your guideline
but you could choose how to do that. For example, for the
teaching of art, you are supposed to spend 2 hours a week
teaching art. You can choose to have 2 one-hour lessons a week,
you could have one 2-hour lesson a week, you could save up that
time and maybe once a month have a full art day in the
classroom. So there is an amount of flexibility available to
teachers in schools in how they would like to break up the day.
But again most schools do abide. If they're Catholic schools,
they do abide by the policy of having half-hour lessons
everyday in the teaching of religion, and for most schools it's
traditional that it's from twelve until half twelve every day.
So that is probably the most consistent time in schools
throughout the country.

Valerie: For the religious class, like you just mentioned you
were not trained to do that.

Deirdre:  For the teaching of religion, well if you're trained
in an Irish training college, it's not part of your teaching
degree. So in Ireland you get bachelor degree of education
which qualifies you in teaching primary schools. But also
throughout your education, you also study for and qualify in a
diploma in religious education if when you're qualified in an
Irish University for primary school teachers, so you do need
that qualification technically to teach in a Catholic primary
school in Ireland. If somebody has trained, for example, in
England, there'd be many teachers that have trained in England
teaching in Irish schools, they have a certain number of years
to gain that qualification for the teaching of religion. So a
lot of schools would if you're trained outside of Ireland and
you want to work in a primary school, you may be restricted to
teaching in a resource post or learning support post where you
would have one subject to teach, for example, maths, and you
would be helping children that need extra help in maths or, for
example, English is commonly taught as well in the resources. So
until you have gained your qualification in the teaching of
religion, you're not really fully qualified to teach it in the
Irish school. So a lot of teachers that come from England to
teach in Irish schools, they would do night courses to qualify
themselves in their diploma in religion. The same problem
exists for the teaching of Irish. Irish is a compulsory subject
in Irish primary schools. You need to be qualified to teach
that. Again if you're qualified in an Irish university, you
will have that qualification. If you come from a university
abroad, you would have to study for it and pass that exam
before you're actually supposed to teach it in a mainstream
classroom.

Valerie:  Ok. And you just mentioned about qualifications and
what type of qualification s do you need to have in order to be
a primary education teacher?

Deirdre:  At the moment, there are 3 main types of
qualifications that teachers hold in Irish primary schools. The
older primary school teachers are NT's, they're national
teachers and they qualified over a year and half many years
ago, maybe those that are 30 years teaching, would be NT's,
that would be their qualification. After that is the B.Ed, the
Bachelor in Education, that's a 3-year degree course and that
can be done in about 4 different colleges in the Republic of
Ireland, so that's your basic teaching qualification. Once you
come into teaching then you have a 1-year probationary year
where the Department of Education will send in inspectors to
check your teaching through the year and make sure it's up to
standard. And after a year you get your diploma in teaching
which fully qualifies you, you're then fully qualified to
teach. In recent years due to shortage of teachers in Ireland,
there is also the postgraduate diploma in teaching. So for
people who have degrees, they can be in anything from science
to engineering, there are limited number of places available to
postgrads to join colleges as well and they can qualify in a
year and half with their postgraduate diploma in teaching and
that's also an acceptable qualification for teaching in primary
schools.

Valerie:  Right. And just to go back to class, what is the size
of the class in general and is it co-ed?

Deirdre: It depends on the school whether or not they're co-ed
or not, as I mentioned in our local town, there's an all boys
school and all girls school and the co-ed school is the Scoil
Lan Gaelach which is the school that teaches through the medium
of Irish language. There is no ordinary co-ed primary school in
our local town. In the countryside, most schools are co-ed
because again you know it's more difficult for people to travel
to schools and to travel into a town, for example, if they want
to get certain type of schools so. Most of the country schools
are co-ed. The size of the classes depends very much on the
number of children in the school, whether it's a country school
or a town school. So, for example, in country school, if it's a
very small country school with over 12 children in the school,
you're entitled to 2 teachers. So there are some classrooms in
the remote country schools that might have 8 children in the
entire classroom, but they could be in 4 class levels as well.
So there's an extra bit of work to that. They can go right up
to classes of over 30 children. So you can have a 2-teacher
school with 12 children in the entire school or 2-teacher
school with 60 children in the entire school. So it's very much
depending on the area that you're in. Most classes in general in
primary schools would have over 25 children, between 25 and 35
children. If you're in a designated disadvantaged school as
well, there's a special initiative to keep class sizes lower in
those schools where possible, so they would have more in the
region of 20 children per class in those schools, but it's very
much depending on the area that you're in and whether or not
you're designated disadvantaged or not.

Valerie: Right.

