Karen: My name is Karen. I'm from Nenagh, County Tipperary, and
I work as a part-time jewellery salesperson. I work from 10 to
6, so I'd be in around 10 to 10. My first job is to hoover the
shop and then my next job is to clean the glass and replace any
jewellery missing from the show cabinets, show cases. After that
then I'm dealing with customers and ordering stock and that's
the way it goes from 10 to 6.

Valerie: And what type of jewellery do you sell in the shop?

Karen: Well, we sell costume jewellery and then we sell, you
know, more expensive jewellery, diamond, gold, pieces like
that.

Valerie: What types of customers do you have?

Karen: We have a good variety of customers from very young
children with pocket money to mature people and old people, all
ages come into the shop looking for gifts and presents and that
kind of thing, personal jewellery.

Valerie: What's the most popular items or, you know, stones?

Karen: At the moment we are selling a range, it's called Coeur
De Lion, it's a German company even though it has a French
name. And it's all hand-made pieces from acrylics and silver
and Swarovski crystals, and they are very colourful and they
are very very popular and they are our best seller now at the
moment. We are the only stockist in Tipperary, so it's a very
good product to sell at the moment.

Valerie: What is the biggest amount that you've ever sold in one
day?

Karen: In one day, it would've been Christmas Eve and I myself
would've taken in about 3000 Euros but it was very busy, we
worked right through the day.

Valerie: How long have you been on this job?

Karen: I've been working part-time in the shop for the last 4
years.

Valerie: What's the best part that you enjoy?

Karen: I enjoy meeting people, meet a great variety of people.
Then we also have a few regulars, they come in every week and I
think a lot of the time they are probably lonely and they come
in for the chat. Sometimes they buy, but I think it's mostly
for the chat. But I enjoy it.

Valerie: And what's the worst part?

Karen: The worst part is the cleaning the glass because people
insist on touching the glass with their dirty fingers and they
bring their children in with their sticky fingers and you could
have spent an hour cleaning the glass and then you have to go
back and clean it all over again after they've gone.

Valerie: What different brands did you carry in the shop?

Karen: We sell New Bridge, that's popular, Coeur De Lion, that's
the costume jewellery, that's popular as well. Then we sell
Genesis, they're more picture frames and ornaments. And our
goldsmith in the shop, he designs jewellery himself, so a lot
of the stuff then after that is handmade, hand-customed
jewellery.

Valerie: Anything happened like unforgettable?

Karen: Yes, the funniest moment was when an American tourist
came into the shop. It must've been my 3rd week working in the
shop. And he came in looking for Irish, and this is how he
phrased it Irishy door knobs . So I thought this was very funny
because we don't sell door knobs, we sell jewellery. And I tried
to explain this to him but he insisted that we did sell Irish
door knobs. So I thought that was very funny. It took me 15
minutes to tell him that we didn't have Irish door knobs in the
shop.

Valerie: Why was he looking for a door knob?

Karen: Because he said that it should have a Claddagh symbol on
it. And Claddagh is synonymous with Ireland and that's what he
wanted, an Irish door knob with the Claddagh symbol and he
thought that's what we sold.

Valerie: What's the age group that come into the shop?

Karen: We have, I suppose, 15, 16 year-olds would come in. They
have part-time jobs, so they'd come in and they'd be buying
mostly silver because that'd be cheaper than gold. That's
normally what they start off with. Then you have young children
coming in with their pocket money and if they'd made their
Communion or their Confirmation, they'd have more money. So
they'd be coming in to buy watches or other pieces of jewellery
for themselves. And then people come in, they are getting
engaged, you know, so you'd have young couples coming in and
they'd be, I suppose, in their mid 20's to any age really come
in to buy their engagement rings. And then you'd have more
mature couples coming in then buying individual gifts for their
spouses or family.

Valerie: So when you get busy, you are very busy.

Karen: Yes, it's feast or famine. You could have days when
there's nothing but cleaning, cleaning, cleaning, and then you
could have days where you don't get a chance to go upstairs
there are so many people coming in to the shop. And if there's
only 2 people behind the counter, and there's people coming
into the shop all the time, you can't leave the shop. So,
everyday is different.

Valerie: Is it seasonal or are you busy everyday?

Karen: The watch repairs and clock repairs, they're the things
that keep going, they're there everyday. So that's what keeps
the trade ticking over, there's always money coming into the
shop.

Valerie: Is this recession affecting your business?

Karen: No, people are still spending money, they're still
getting married, and they're still repairing their watches. So,
it hasn't affected the shop.

Valerie: Would you kind of plan to set up a business for your
own?

Karen: That is something that I'm aiming towards, but in order
to set up a business in Ireland you need a lot of capital
behind you. So that'll take a couple of years to save up
enough, but that's my future goal is to set up my own shop.

Valerie: Do you plan to stay in the shop for another while as
part-time.

Karen: Yes, I'd like to get experience maybe in the city, in
city shops, bigger shops, jewellery shops, and they'd be much
much busier and you'd be dealing with more money. So, I'd like
to get some experience there as well before I decide to set up
my own.

Valerie: And you just mentioned that you see a lot of teenagers,
15, 16 years old coming into the shop, spending lots of money
buying the jewellery. I was just wondering where do they get
the money from and what's your view on young people spending
lots of money on jewellery.

Karen: Well, a lot of them would have part-time jobs in petrol
stations or fast-food restaurants or babysitting or whatever,
so they have money and pocket money as well. I see a lot of
them coming in buying presents for their boyfriends and
girlfriends, and sometimes I feel that they are being silly
spending all their money, a few hundred Euros on a boyfriend or
girlfriend that might not be their boyfriend or girlfriend next
week. So, I just think it's an awful waste of money, young
people they do waste money.

Valerie: What's the biggest amount that you've ever seen a young
person spend?

Karen: The biggest amount would've been 300Euros and it would've
been on an 18-karat gold and diamond necklace, and it was
engraved. And this boy had bought this for his girlfriend, and
he must've been around 16. It was for her birthday. And they
broke up the next week, and she came back in with the gift, and
she wanted to return it so that she could give him his money
back, but because it was engraved at the back, we couldn't give
them their money back. So that was a pity.

Valerie: Did you see that coming? Say if some young people come
ino the shop, wants to buy something really expensive, would
you kind of like tell them not to do that?

Karen: No, I can't do that. I can try and show them other
things, but I cannot be seen to. If they want to spend a lot of
money, it's my job to take that money off them. I can't be seen
to turn away money. If a very young child comes in and they
only have 5 Euros and they want to spend 10 Euros or the item
that they see is worth 10 Euros, on the law of averages,
because they're young, because they don't have a lot of money,
we would give them the item for 5 euros even it was worth 10.
And if you have maybe a really old person, you know, you might
leave money off them as well, and regular customers sometimes
you have to knock some money off for them because they're
regular and they're guaranteed to come back so we treat them
well. But ordinarily there's no discounts.

Valerie: Do you need to get permission from your boss for giving
discounts?

Karen: Yes. Unless I'm managing the shop myself if they're away
on holidays, I can use my own discretion but ordinarily I have
to ok everything before I can give discount.

Valerie: At the end of your working day, do you have to do the
book-keeping?

Karen: No, that's not my responsibility. They employ someone to
do the accounting, the book-keeping.

Valerie: As far as I know, sometimes it happens, the amount of
the jewellery sold doesn't balance the cash you received, if a
situation like that happened, how do you deal with it?

Karen: Well, we go through everything. I have to account for
everything that I sell. So everything that I sell I write into
a book. So I know exactly how much I've taken in. If money does
go missing, there's actually 3 family members working in the
shop. And sometimes they take money out to pay suppliers out of
the till and they may not document it and they might not put a
receipt on the till to state that money is out. But there's
usually a good reason if there's out. We've never been out by
much, and if it has been, it's one of the family members has
taken money out to pay suppliers or they borrow money to get
lunch or something.

Valerie: You just said the business hasn't been affected by this
recession.

Karen: No. People are still getting engaged, people are still
buying presents for their family members, wedding presents,
birthday presents, anniversary presents, and Communion
presents. And you know people still wear watches as long as
people are wearing watches and celebrating birthdays and
anniversaries and getting married, there's always, it's a good
profession to have.

