Interviewer V: Ok Mike, could you tell me something about
yourself?

Mike: I was born in 1992 in Nigeria and then I moved to France
for a bit for my dad’s job and we moved to England when I was
eight years old. And I now live in Caversham in Reading.

Interviewer V: Do you remember Nigeria?

Mike: Not really but we’ve got videos and cds and things of what
it was like. But of course cos I was a baby at the time, I don’t
really remember anything. But my older sister does because she
was four or five years old so she’s got memories of friends and
things there.

Interviewer V: Have you ever travelled to Africa or anywhere
outside Europe?

Mike: No. Well I’ve been to America when I was younger and
normally what I, what we do as a family is we go to France or
Italy or Spain because my mum’s fluent in Spanish and of course
the whole family’s fluent in French because we lived there for a
bit.

Interviewer V: Are you fluent in French?

Mike: I am fluent in French. I can read and speak and listen to
it but I’m not so good at writing because we left France just
as we were beginning to learn how to spell and things, so I can
speak it and I can read it, but I can’t write it at all.

Interviewer V: Do you like France?

Mike: Yeah I do. I prefer it to England really. Especially the
food and things and the countryside because you don’t really
get that in England because its so, its such a cramped space
and there’s always towns and cities everywhere but I like being
in the countryside in France, camping or swimming in lakes and
things.

Interviewer V: Tell me about your last holidays, this summer
holidays - what did you do?

Mike: Well what happened is that we didn’t go anywhere this
summer but we went to our cousins’ house, which is really nice,
which is in the countryside, but we didn’t go anywhere for the,
abroad during the summer holidays so we were supposed to go to
Italy this half term instead to make up for that. But that that
didn’t happen because of the flights were cancelled and things.

Interviewer V: Why were the flights cancelled?

Mike: Ah I don’t know, I...probably the weather or something. or
insurance I don’t know.

Interviewer V: Oh dear. What about your hobbies, what sort of
things are you interested in doing?

Mike: Most of my free time I spend in town with friends or at
home cooking with my parents. And we have guinea pigs so I
often have to look after them and we used to have a cat but it
died, so I used to have to look after that. And I play football
for Caversham Boys and we have training on Tuesday nights and
Fridays nights and then sometimes on Saturday mornings as well,
and then we have games on Sundays.

Interviewer V: What’s your position?

Mike: I play left back in the defence.

Interviewer V: Who’s your favourite footballer?

Mike: I’d say my favourite footballer is Thierry Henry probably,
just because he’s so good. But it would, I mean it used to be
Jay-Jay Okocha because I support Bolton but now he’s left it’s
got to be Thierry Henry.

Interviewer V: Who’s your favourite left back? If you have one.

Mike: I’d say Ashley Cole is definitely my favourite footballer
for the fact he’s always everywhere, he runs so much, he does
so much work, so that’s what I really like, is the way he
plays.

Interviewer V: I was interested that you said you do quite a lot
of cooking with your parents. Is that something you enjoy?

Mike: Yeah it is actually because, well mostly what I do is I do
it for my little brothers and sisters because well I’ve got
quite a big family, a family of five children. So I cook for
their dinners which is quite nice because they’re always SO
chatty about it and like to talk to me about it. So also it’s
not so much for the cooking I also do it because they like to
talk about it with me. It’s something to talk about and
something I can improve on with other people's help and rather
than getting stuck into my own life.

Interviewer V: What sort of food do you cook?

Mike: Well I used to do cookies and icecream and sort of
puddings and things, but now I do Yorkshire pudding, lamb
chops, spaghetti. Pretty, normally pretty simple meals but
occasionally I’ll do it on a, for a Sunday roast or something
which we like to have in our family after church or whatever in
the morning. We have a big meal at lunch time which I like to
help my dad cook.

Interviewer V: Yorkshire pudding is something very specially
English. Could you describe what it is?

Mike: It's basically just batter which is just cooked in an Aga
and it’s really soft and it can be quite crunchy on the
outside, but it’s really soft and it’s full of air on the
inside, so it it’s not particularly filling but it’s very nice
because of the texture.

Interviewer V: Good. Could you tell us something about Reading?
I mean Reading is where you live, what is there to do in
Reading?

Mike: Mostly what we do is we go to Forbury Gardens which is
like a park where you can just sit and relax. Occasionally
we’ll see a film or go shopping in The Oracle. There’s not
really that much to do but, yeah just go shopping, relax or see
a film or eat. Eat at restaurants like Pizza Hut, MacDonalds and
if you’ve got a lot of money you can go somewhere nice like
Tootsies or whatever, really.

Interviewer V: Do you ever go to other towns?

Mike: Yeah I went to Cambridge with my friend Sam at the
weekend. And then I go to London sometimes. Sometimes we go to
Birmingham or Bristol. Sometimes we go to the seaside,
especially in the summer and the spring, but if it’s winter
because it’s, I mean because it’s not sunny it’s not really
worth going somewhere else because it’s not sunny enough. And
also the train fares are quite expensive so it’s not really
worth going anywhere if it’s cold and rainy.

Interviewer V: What did you do in Cambridge?

Mike: I was, my friend Sam has...his grandparents have a house
there so I was staying with them and Sam and his family. And we
went into Cambridge too, we visited some universities and then
we just walked around town for a bit and did some shopping.

Interviewer V: Would you like to go to university in Cambridge?

Mike: My whole family has always gone to New College in Oxford
so I think, I’m really going to have to go to New College
because my parents, my sister’s going to go there I think, my
grandparents, my uncles and aunts... So I think I’ll go to
Oxford but I would quite like to go to Cambridge and I think I
will apply and if I don’t get into Oxford then I’d like to go
to Cambridge yeah.

Interviewer V: Do you know what you’d like to study at
university?

Mike: I’d love to study fine art or fashion design or
photography cos those are the three things that I’m quite good
at naturally.

Interviewer V: That’s interesting. Do you do a lot of
photography now?

Mike: Yeah I just bought a new camera because I’ve been saving
up for a year now and so I bought a new camera. I’ve been going
around all weekend taking photos in the countryside. At school
we don’t really get to do it much but I do art at school and
it’s just something that I really enjoy doing.

Interviewer V: Good. How about you, you were talking about fine
art and what was it the third one was fashion?

Mike: I’d like to do fashion design because unlike photography
and art it’s not, it’s a subject where you’re always going to
get the same amount of pay because it’s, it’s more like a
business than art. Whereas art and photography it can be up and
down and you don’t know how much you’re gonna get paid. But I’d
love to do something in art because that’s, that’s just what
I’m good at, that’s...I’m not so good at maths or science.
I’m, I like art and English and languages and things.

Interviewer V: And who’s your favourite artist?

Mike: I’m not sure. I do like Paul Cezanne and I do like
Modigliani. Because my grandparents, my granddad who’s in
hospital now, he used to take me to the exhibitions in France
and in, and in London so that sort of that’s sort of like a
memory of him and I’ve always sort of liked that kind of art.
Figure drawings.

Interviewer V: Good. One last question what are you doing after
this interview?

Mike: After this interview I’m going into town to get my friend
a birthday present and then I have to go to a party tonight
which is a fancy dress party. So I’m going to have to think of
something to dress up as. I thought I would dress up as a
builder but I’m not really sure.

Interviewer V: How do you dress up as a builder what kind of
clothes do you wear?

Mike: I don’t know but I saw my brother had a builder hat so I
just thought I’d wear that and wear normal clothes.

Interviewer V: Sorry how many how many brothers and sister have
you got?

Mike: Including me there’s five children in the family. I’ve got
an elder sister Claudia who’s seventeen, I’m fourteen, my little
si my  younger sister Anna is eleven and she’s in...she’s just
started secondary school, and my little brother, my only
brother is seven and my littler sister is five. So she’s only
just started primary school.

Interviewer V: That’s a lot of, a lot of children in one family.

Mike: Yeah it’s quite hard work sometimes because you never get
the a room to yourself but I’d rather have a big family than a
smaller family and be by myself the whole time.

Interviewer V: Ok. Well thank you very much indeed.

Mike: Thank you.

Interviewer V: We’ll finish it there.

Mike: Right. Thanks.
