Hannes: First of all, I would like you to just, to talk a bit
about where you're from, and, what made you come to Germany,
why you decided to come to Germany, and yeah tell us a bit how
you got to come to Germany and how you found your host family.

Molly:   OK. Well, my name is Molly Laatsch and I come
from Aurora, Illinois, and it's about 45 minutes away from
Chicago, west and, yeah, that's about it. What was — why I came
here?

Hannes: Yeah. What made you come to Germany? Why did you choose
Germany?

Molly: OK. Well, I was here cos my family is German. I wanted to
learn German, because my Grandpa can speak German, or he used to
be able to, but then he never used it. And, so then my Dad only
knew little things from when he was young and his Dad taught
him and then I only knew small things, like Ach, du meine Güte
I know  and things like that, like, before I came, but
I wanted to learn, like, real German and I wanted to learn it
well, and not from a book, because I feel, like, if you learn
it from a book then when you get to the country then you're
just gonna, like, worry, about all the rules you learned and
not worry about, like, actually connecting with people and
learning through hearing and things like that, like you're just
gonna worry about what you learned and not worry about learning
new things. So I thought it would be better if I just came
here, not knowing anything, and then learn what I wanted to
learn here. And

Hannes: Did you ever hear your Grandad speak German?

Molly: Sometimes when he was mad — when he would be mad, he
would, like, just like say things to himself in German, but he
didn't use it for — He came to America when he was, like, five.

Hannes: Alright. So he didn't have a German accent or anything?

Molly: No, and he didn't ever — because when they came here, it
was kinda like World War 2 and nobody wanted to speak German,
nobody wanted to be German, and so, like, they never used it
and they didn't even talk German at home, because, it was,
like, embarrassing, so, then he doesn't remember it anymore
because he was five, and so, that's a long time. He just
remembers things that his Dad would say, and things like that,
so

Hannes: Ah, I see, OK.

Molly: Yeah .

Hannes: And tell us a bit about your real family, your personal
family. Tell us a bit about your personal background.

Molly: OK. I live with my parents, and my sister. My sister is
21 years old and my Dad's name is Harold and my Mom's name is
Julie and my mother is a gym teacher in an elementary school,
so she teaches kids from kindergarden, which is like age 5 to
fifth grade which is what, like, ten or eleven, I don't, I
don't really know any more  and my Dad — I don't really
know, like, what the official title is of what he does, but he
goes into people's houses, he has, like, certain clients and
they buy, home theater systems from him, with like, big huge,
like TV screens and big speakers and everything and he goes
into their houses — He sells them to them and then he goes in
and he puts them in, installs them and everything and sets them
up the way they should be so that you can get a "maximal hearing
and viewing pleasure" , that's what he says. And stuff
like that. And my sister, right now she studies at Illinois
State University in Bloomington, Illinois, and that's it.

Hannes: OK. And, can you tell us a bit what it looks like where
you live? What kind of house do you live in, what's the place
like?

Molly: Aurora is really big, and it's kind of interesting,
because there are so many, like, different people in Aurora,
because it's so big and it's such a multi-cultural, just,
society itself, in itself because — I live way on the west
side, and then, as you go farther east it gets more — We have a
lot of illegal immigrants in Aurora from Mexico, I don't know
why they would come to Aurora, Illinois, it's kinda weird but
, we have 'em. And so the farther you go east, the more
Hispanic it gets, and once you get onto the actual east side,
once you cross over the river — there's a river that separates
east and west side, once you get onto the east side street
signs are in Spanish and stores are in Spanish and everything
like that, it's weird.

Hannes: Oh really?

Molly: Yeah, but where I live on the west side, way west, I live
almost in Sugar Grove which is, like, some next town over, it's
mostly suburbs, it's a suburb.

Hannes: So that's mostly white, or is it a mixed neighborhood?

Molly: No no no, mine is a mixed neighborhood. Yeah, my neighbor
to the right side is an Indian family, the neighbor to the left
side is a Mexican family, and then, yeah, there are white
people, there are black people, we have everything .
Yeah, my house is your normal, like, suburban house, you know,
like a raised ranch where it's — you walk in and there's a
foyer where you put your shoes and then, there are stairs that
go upstairs and stairs that go downstairs. And then when you go
upstairs there's the kitchen, living room, dining room, your
bedrooms and stuff like that, bathroom. And then when you go
downstairs, that's family room where you watch TV and laundry
room and my Dad's office is downstairs and stuff like that.

Hannes: And what does a typical day for you look like in Aurora?

Molly: Ahm.

Hannes: So far.

Molly: Well, normally I would go to school during the day. I go
to school at 7.45 that is when it starts and then I go all day
long until 2.45 as I think, we get out 2.45 or, like 3, we get
out, I don't know, I don't remember. Yeah and then,
after that I would go swimming for, nope, I'd come home and
have a snack , eat something, and then I would go
swimming for maybe an hour or two. When I was on the swimming
team, I would go for about two hours or so and then come home,
eat again , do some homework and then maybe watch a
movie with my Dad and go to bed.

Hannes: Alright. So, swimming is your, or used to be your
favorite hobby? Or your favorite past time? Do you have any
other favorite things to do or you're a full-blown swimmer?

Molly:  No, I was pretty much just a swimmer for a
really long time and now that I don't swim anymore — this
summer I worked for a swim team so I was a coach. Mostly, I
swam  but then I would help with the little kids
sometimes and then during the summer I just lay out all day
long, I don't do anything, really. Or I go shopping if it's
rainy with my sister. Stuff like that, just kinda hang out.

Hannes: And what did you teach them?

Molly: Just how to swim. Not like they couldn't swim at all, but
just making them better, cos it was still a swim team but they
were younger, just for fun, it's just swimming for fun, but
still they wanna learn how to swim better. So, you tell them
oh, you need to put your elbows to the sky and you need to put
your head down a little more, stuff like that.

Hannes: Where did you spend your last holidays?

Molly: I have to think, that's a long time ago. We didn't go on
any this summer, just because I was leaving, and so I had to
work before but I think Yeah at last Christmas — we go to
Florida every Christmas, because my grandparents live in
Florida during the winter and so we go to their condominium and
stay there for the two-week Christmas break, and that was the
last, I think, yeah. — That was the last Christmas, like, the
last holiday I went on was in Florida we go near Bradenton,
well we go to Bradenton  and that's near Sarasota Tampa
Bay area, or if you know anything about that, I don't know if
you do , yeah.

Hannes: And what was your favorite holiday, what was your
favorite place that you've seen so far?

Molly: Oh when I was, oh, how old was I? Maybe a freshman in
high school, or maybe in eighth grade, I don't remember how old
I was, we went to Curacao, which is in the Dutch Carribean, and
it's beautiful and that was my favorite. We stayed there for
two weeks and oh, it was just amazing.

Hannes: OK. Cool. So you could go swimming all day long in the
beautiful

Molly: Yeah, just like hang out and do nothing , it was
great. Yeah.

Hannes: palm groves. Cool. And do you have any plans for your
next holidays? Your next vacation?

Molly: I don't know. My sister told me when she was here that
when I come home maybe my parents will give, like, for my
graduation present — because I don't know, I don't really —
What did my sister get? Oh, she got, like, — I think she got a
computer, but I already have one, so — or like a camera or
something. I already have that, so  they said maybe
they would take us to Disney World, even though we've been
there like 16 times, it's cool but that will be exciting
.

Hannes: Alright.

Molly: Yeah. Cos we're embarrassed of, like, Disney World a lot
.

Hannes: You feel embarrassed of going there, or

Molly: Oh no, I love it . All the people are like "why
do you still like Disney World, you're 18 years old?" It's just
a great place to be , I like it.

Hannes: What do you think of the German schools? Tell me a bit
about the German schools, especially if you compare it to the
American high schools. What's your impression?

Molly: I don't know, I like — it's kind of weird because, like,
I don't understand cos I only have six or seven hours of school
a day in America, but I don't get out until 3. I don't
understand how I can have the same amount here and be out at 1.
It doesn't make sense to me because it's not like we, like,
dilly-dally around and waste a lot of time in America. Like, we
have 1 hour off, a free hour, where we have — half of it, you
eat lunch and the other half you do homework or something like
that. So, I don't understand, like, how I can still be at
school for, like, two or three more hours longer than I am here
and sit the same amount of courses. That's kinda weird, but I do
like how you guys have, like, a class — I think the class is
nice to have because then, like, you have a sense of unity,
kind of, because in America you don't really have that, every
class you go to there are different people and so I think if
you're new, coming to a school, especially a high school,
especially a high school of my size, I can imagine how it'd be
really really hard to be a foreign exchange student in my high
school, to learn pe people no, to meet new people because I
think it'd be — I just think it'd be really hard cos there is
so many people to meet and how do you get started, like, there
is so much to do and I don't know. And then I think it'd be
really intimidating because you're never with the same person
twice because there are so many people.

Hannes: And do you prefer this intimacy sort of in Germany or do
you — what do you think is the advantage of the American system
if you compare it?

Molly: I don't know. I think the advantage of the American
system is — well because in Germany they have Gymnasium and
then they have Realschule and then they have the other one, I
forgot what it's called . And I think that's kind of a
bad idea, because then, I don't know I feel like all the
Gymnasium kids, they only learn how to deal with kids of their
caliber, they don't learn how to deal with, like, they don't
learn how to speak to Realschule kids. And in America, you —
everyone goes to the same high school, there's no, like, smart
kid high school, stupid kid high school, we don't have that.
It's just high school. And so, I don't know, I think it's — I
think that part of our system is better. And then because you
go to all these different classes with all different kinds of
people, then you just learn how to interact with other people
and you learn how to deal with smart people and you learn how
to deal with stupid people and mean people and nice people,
like, you meet all kinds of people and I think that's better. I
don't know, I feel like the German system, I don't know, from my
first host sister I kind of learned that — she kind of had this
whole thing, like, oh Realschule, bad! That's where stupid
people are, you don't go there and stuff like that, like, I
don't know.

Hannes: Alright. And did you have a very bad experience here at
the school, can you tell of any very bad experiences?

Molly: No, everyone's been really nice to me and I don't really
have to worry about doing anything really for school because
I'm already finished, but, no, I don't really have anything.
Sometimes teachers think, like, I don't under stand she doesn't
understand that because she doesn't know German. She doesn't
understand this text at all because she doesn't know German,
but

Hannes: How do you react then?

Molly: I'm just like, you're wrong! I really know what that says
and I could tell you pretty much everything that this person
wants to tell you , but I don't really, like,
participate much. And then that's kind of an advantage for me
on tests, when I don't, like, feel like answering a question I
can just write I don't understand what you're asking me
, so it's OK .

Hannes: OK. Has there ever been a situation where you were
really mad at a German teacher?

Molly: Today I got really mad at my, actually my German teacher
because we did this text and it wasn't hard but he made it seem
like it was just so hard and when he passed it out, when he gave
us the papers and everything he was, like, he was going by
talking to everyone about it and then he comes up to me and
he's like You don't have to worry about it. I know you can't
understand that. And I was like OK, cool, whatever. And then,
like, as we're going through everyone, one by one, every person
down the row, and they had to say something about the text, like
what a certain line meant or something, like, you just picked a
line and you said what it meant. And he just skipped over me.
And I was like I know what that means. Can I please say it? and
he's like No no no, you don't understand, it's OK, we don't, you
don't have to participate and I said No, I know what it means
and, we kinda got into a little fight because he wouldn't
listen to me .

Hannes: Oh gosh! Well, those teachers.

Hannes: Well, on a different topic, do you have any plans for
your future? Or what are your plans after school?

Molly: Well, when I go back this year then I go to college and
I'm gonna study German  and maybe I'll do, like, some
business with that, just so that I can get, like, a background,
or I'll get a teaching certificate to back it up, but I don't
really know, like, what I want to do with German or with my
life yet  yeah, I don't know. I have no idea what I
wanna do. And I don't know really what I can do with German,
but I know I wanna study foreign languages and I wanna do
something with foreign languages because I really like them,
and yeah.

Hannes: Do you feel you have people that you can talk about this
topic?

Molly: Like, what do you mean, like?

Hannes: Do you feel you have people that can counsel you on this
topic?

Molly: Into, like, telling me what to do? Or what I can do?

Hannes: Yeah, or basically like — If you compare it to the
American system where you have high school counselors, do you
have something comparable, where you feel this is comparable in
Germany?

Molly: I don't have anyone, like, official, like a high school
counselor that can help me but my host Mom now is really
knowledgeable about things like that and she's really good
about getting things done, so if I say, like, oh, I wanna talk
to—I wanna set up a meeting with this person to see if I can
maybe do this, then she calls that person right away or within
the next, like, 3 days to make sure that I can talk to them and
I can meet with this person and stuff like that, like, if I were
to say I wanna go to the American embassy to see if maybe in 20
years I can have a job there, she'd call them up, like, in 20
minutes and say OK, Molly Laatsch coming in 2pm Thursday,
she'll be there .

Hannes: What would be your dream job? What kind of expectation
do you have as far as your job is concerned?

Molly: I don't really know. I would really like — I don't know —
I really have no idea, because there's just a lot of things that
I'm interested in but the problem is is that none of them really
connect and none of them are ever gonna be useful in life
, like German. When are you gonna use that other than
when you live in Germany or in Europe, and I don't. And then I
don't know, I like literature a lot and again when are you
gonna use that other than when you're an English teacher or a
literature teacher? Never! And so I don't know. If I could do
anything in the world, I think I would just live in Austria
and, I don't know, find a job. Just so that I can speak German
all day long and  — I don't know, I like people a lot,
so.

Hannes: Have you ever seriously considered going back to Europe
or staying in Europe forever?

Molly: Yeah, but I don't think I could. I don't know why — I
think it would be really hard on my family if I did that
because we're a very close, tight family because there's only
four of us and it was really hard for them when I left. I was
OK, I was just like see you guys later, I'll be back in a year,
but they all had a really hard time with it and I think it would
be — I don't know, I — it would be my dream to come back, I
would love to do it but I couldn't do that to my family. They'd
have a really hard time with it.

Hannes: Alright.

Hannes: I would like to discuss one last question with you. What
do you think of the — what is your impression of the German or
we already talked about this, the German school system, but if
you could choose, do you think — which one do you prefer, the
American system or the German system?

Molly: Ahm, I don't know. I would prefer if I could mix them
because I like the American system a lot because, like I said,
you learn — I think it's more — I think the most important
thing that you can get out of school is how to relate with
other people. I don't really care, like, what you learn in
school, as long as, like, you're learning it with other people
and you're learning how to interact with other people because I
think that's a really important life skill to have, because how
can you expect yourself to go out in the world and be
successful when you can't speak to someone, when you're too shy
or you're too — you think you're too great, like, things like
that. You can't — I don't think you can go into a situation
thinking Oh, I'm so much prettier than that girl, she can't be
my friend. Things like that, like, I think that's bad and I
think that — in the American system you learn how to deal with
people, but I would like the German system because then I get
out at, like, 11 o'clock everyday and I can go home and take a
nap . To go home and eat a big lunch and just pass out
on the couch for an hour or two and then go swimming or
something like that, that's what I would like. If I could mix
them.

Hannes: And from your experience in Germany so far, what do you
think are the typical character traits of the Germans? Did they
match your expectations?

Molly: Of German people? I don't know. cos like, the biggest
impressions that I have are from my two host families and they
are completely different from each other. I would say that
Germans are very environmental  like, it doesn't matter
what German you're talking to, like, it could be, like, a
teenage girl that goes out and go shopping everyday, she still
wouldn't, like, spit her gum out on the ground like in Amer
America like any American person would, like. They're very
environmental and they're usually really on time, rarely ever
are they late, and, what else? They're also really proud of
being smart and every German person just really wants to be
very smart, and I find that funny because in America a lot of
people just wanna, like, be modest about it, if they're smart
they just don't really talk about it, they just leave it at
that, like when someone says Wow, you're really smart! they say
Oh, no, no, it's not really, that kind of thing but in Germany,
if people say, like, You're really smart then they, like, start
talking about, like, how smart they are, like, what they know
and stuff like that and where they got it , things like
that. That's that's what I would say is, like, the typical
German thing is everyone wants to learn and everyone is just
wanting to be so smart and, like, the best thing you can do is
be smart.

Hannes: OK. Well, cool.

Molly: Yeah.

Hannes: Thanks a lot.
