Catherine: Good morning.

Michael: Good morning.

Catherine: Thank you very much for agreeing to do an interview
with us today. I just wondered if you could start by telling us
a little bit about where we are here today, please.

Michael: OK. We’re sitting in the back garden of a nursing home
in a village called Martock in Somerset. We’re about 7 miles
west of Yeovil. We’ve got a heatwave on; everybody’s wandering
round not knowing quite what to do with themselves and
sweltering in the heat. But we’re trying not to complain about
it because we don’t get as much heat as we would like, so we’re
living with it.

Catherine: And you said we’re sitting here in a nursing home.
Could you talk a little bit about the building, perhaps?

Michael: OK.

Catherine: I noticed when I came in that you had one of the blue
plaques.

Michael: We do.

Catherine: Is it a historical building?

Michael: Yes, it is. We have a building here which the — divides
really into three parts. The front where you came in is an
eighteenth century listed building. It was a manor house
originally, back in the eighteenth century. It continued as a
private home well into the twentieth century and we’ve had
contact with the people that owned it before it became a
nursing home in the late 60s early 70s. They saw the place on
the web and were very disappointed to find their swimming pool
has been filled in, so life has moved on. In 197-something,
we’re not quite sure exactly when, it became originally a
guest house, and then a residential home for elderly people.
But as the nature of needs in society moved on, eventually it
became a nursing home in the 1980s. An extension was built and
then we built a rather lovely home stone extension again on
after that in 2005. So we’ve got a building that’s grown both
in terms of size and youth indeed as the years have gone by.

Catherine: So could you talk a little bit perhaps about how the
care system works in the UK and perhaps a little bit about the
difference between state and private healthcare and how this
plays out in the nursing care system?

Michael: OK. You’re right to draw a distinction between state
and private. There is a very considerable distinction. There is
an overlap but essentially we’re talking about 2 levels of care
in the UK. Local authorities will fund care, either at the
residential level or more intensively at the nursing level for
people with greater needs, but according to a very strict
amount of money financially. And anybody that has more than
21,000 pounds currently, or 22,000 pounds I think it is, of
their own money at the moment, can’t attract that financial
support, so you have to have very little of your own money to
get that support. And then as people’s money drops down below
that level, the state will step in with more and more funding.
But only up to a certain financial level and for nursing care
that’s around about the 550 pounds a week mark in this area.
That sounds a great deal of money but of course it doesn’t
actually buy a lot in nursing care terms. Nursing care is very
expensive to provide. The private market of which we are part
tends to charge considerably more than that.

Catherine: So could you talk a little bit, then, about Hurst
Manor as an example of this private — of a privately run
nursing home, perhaps in terms of the number of people you have
here, and the staff perhaps?

Michael: OK. We have 36 beds in 35 rooms here. One at any time
can be occupied by 2 people. That would always be people who
had a connection, like a married couple, maybe 2 sisters,
something like that. More normally, we consider ourselves to be
full at 35, one per room. All of our rooms are en suite with wet
room showers and supported showers. We have a number of very
specific facilities around the home, disabled bathing and
issues of that sort.

Michael: We run an extensive social programme so we have a lot
of activity going on here for folk that want to participate in
it, although there’s no pressure put on anybody. Generally we
find round about half the people that live here at any one time
want to be socially interactive and get together doing things.
So that can be anything from poetry readings through to trips
out to the coast, just depending on what everybody wants at any
one time.

Catherine: And what other activities do you put on here? I saw
on your website that you have quite a full programme here.

Michael: Yes, we do. We try to have something happening pretty
much every day. It could be low key. We have a dedicated
activities organiser who also has an assistant and a number of
volunteers working as well so at the lowest key level, as it
were, we might do reading of the newspaper in the morning or
playing of dominoes in the afternoon, or something like that.
It becomes more intensive, particularly in the summer actually,
when it’s easier to make trips out. We’re just about to acquire
our own minibus, that’s on order now so we’ll be doing a lot
more travelling around. We also bring folk in and we’re living
in an environment where basically most people can’t get out
easily so we bring into Hurst Manor those experiences that folk
have had when they were younger. The hairdresser comes in to our
own hairdressing salon, the manicurist comes in, the
reflexologist comes in. We also bring in musical entertainment
so we will have theatrical and musical acts taking place.
Somebody comes and plays the piano regularly. We do barbecues
in the back garden in the summer where the staff bring their
children and relatives bring their families and the music’s on
and everybody has a good time.

Catherine: That’s lovely. And is it your job to organise that,
or is this done through your entertainments manager, or?

Michael: Well if it goes wrong it’s my fault. They call me ‘The
Boss’ so anything that goes wrong is my fault. But we do have
an activities organiser who deals with all of that. In fact, we
have 2 people: one working at the practical level of making the
things happen, and one who produces the information that you’ve
seen on the website.

Catherine: OK. And so what is your role here as manager? What
sort of things do you take care of here? Is it the day-to-day
running of the —

Michael: Personally, I take overall responsibility for the
running of the home although I have a team of very senior
staff, I’m not a clinically experienced person so I have a
number of clinicians – a matron, a deputy matron, and senior
clinical staff – who look after the medical and care needs of
the home and I tend not to be involved in that. I leave them to
do what they know needs to be done and we’re very clear about
the number of staff they can have on, and so on. I tend to
involve myself more at the policy level so I’m responsible for
how the business moves forward. We’re building another care
home, for example, in Yeovil at the moment and I have a lot of
involvement with that. My personal background, I’m an
accountant, so I tend to look after things financially. I
always oversee monies coming in, monies going out, bookkeeping,
accounts, all of that side of things.

Catherine: OK.

Catherine: And just moving on then, you’re building another care
home down in Yeovil as well, right?

Michael: That’s right.

Catherine: Is there quite a high demand then for care nowadays?

Michael: A huge and growing. We have an elderly population in
the UK which is increasing, both in absolute numbers and in
terms of the proportion of the population over any particular
age. You’ll have heard this term ‘baby boom generation’.
Baby-boomers are now coming up to retirement age and we have
this bulge in the population that’s moved through the years as
the baby-boomer generation has moved on. They’re going to be
needing care and therefore over the next 20 to 30 years there
will be considerable demand for the sort of thing that we do.

Michael: The nature of care that we provide is also changing and
in particular you might be aware of the fact that dementia is
becoming a much more serious problem for people generally, and
is predicted to become more so. We don’t have enough dementia
specialist care homes in the UK at the moment so many of us in
the industry are moving increasingly into training our staff
for servicing people with dementia and looking after their very
specific and unique type of needs. Our new home will have a
dementia floor to it and indeed on the same site we’re planning
to build another one which will be a specially dedicated full
dementia-only care home.

Catherine: As well as dementia, you mentioned there about an
increasingly elderly population going on here. How can you see
care homes sort of having to change or adapt to accommodate the
change — the social change in the population?

Michael: Part of it’s a volume issue because we need more care
than we have so there will need to be more care homes around.
Planning policy is adjusting to accommodate that. It’s actually
not as difficult as you might think to get planning permission
for a care home. Local authorities tend to be very sympathetic
to this particular type of building. The intensity of care is
increasing. If you roll back to, let’s say, 15 years ago,
residential homes for the elderly were very common, not
non-dementia homes now, just people that needed a level of
personal care. What’s changed over the last 15 years is that
people with a relatively low level of need tend to be catered
for at home, so – domiciliary care is the technical term for it
– that carers will go into people’s own homes and look after
them if they have a limited level of need. There is very little
pure residential care going on any more. It’s a financially
driven issue that local authorities who are responsible for
providing care will do so of course in the least cost way
possible and when somebody’s care needs are relatively limited,
the least cost way of meeting them is in their own home. So
typically the market now is either nursing homes where there is
an intense degree of need and in a home like this we have to
have a registered nurse on duty 24 hours a day. Indeed that’s
really what defines a nursing home as a nursing home. It tends
to be that there are nursing homes and there are dementia
specialist residential homes and that’s most of the market.

Catherine: OK. I was also thinking about when you decide that
you need care, it can be quite a traumatic time for both the
person who needs to have the care and also the relatives and
the family. I just wondered if you could say how you try and
reassure those people, perhaps that it’s going to be OK? I was
thinking maybe about loss of independence, or fear of loss of
independence, and the financial implications as well.

Michael: Yes. It’s challenging. In fact perhaps the easiest way
I can explain is when my own parents passed through this stage,
I mean, they’ve passed on now, but some years ago my father was
diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease and as a family we had very
little understanding of what that meant. They came to visit one
Christmas time and we realised how serious the problem was when
Dad couldn’t get out the chair. And in the morning he’d been
able to, come the afternoon he couldn’t so we knew we had an
issue on our hands.

Michael: So we got to the point where Mum and Dad were
intellectually aware that living on their own wasn’t a smart
idea any more but dealing with the emotional implications of
that is really very difficult. As you’ve rightly identified,
you’ve been independent all your life, you’ve done all the
things you want to do without anybody interfering and suddenly
somebody’s saying to you, "Well, actually, it’s not going to be
possible to be quite as independent and free as you used to be".
So in that case we moved father into a care home that I owned at
the time, and mother came and lived in a flat close by and we
were able to support her on a more independent-living basis.
But there was a great deal of trauma for them going through
that process and we found particularly that father oscillated
and one day he would be quite happy with the idea and the next
day he was cancelling the estate agent selling the house. It
was simply something that we had to sail our way through those
stormy seas, we had to just weather as it was.

Catherine: You — I suppose then that having that own personal
experience must be very useful when you’re dealing with
families and relatives and children coming?

Michael: We get a lot of folk coming here who are in the same
position emotionally that we as a family were in when we faced
those issues. So yes, having been through it is very useful in
that context.

Michael: What I do say to people is that for the person coming
in, there is no long-term commitment, particularly in the
initial stage. So some people need the emotional reassurance of
keeping their house, for example, not selling it for a period of
time. We have one gentleman here in his 90s. He’s been with us I
think probably 3 years now. He still owns a house and
occasionally he will still go back and visit. He likes to have
the reassurance of it being there. The practical reality is he
needs to be here, otherwise he would have gone back home a long
time ago. But some people actually need not to cut their ties
with the possibility of independent living. In practical terms
as I say, folk are here because they need to be, they need the
physical support, sometimes the mental support of somebody
else.

Catherine: You mentioned there about the need to sell your
house.

Michael: Yes.

Catherine: Sometimes to afford the care here. There was an
article in the newspaper yesterday about possible legislation
that would come in so that elderly people wouldn’t necessarily
have to sell their homes to fund care. Do you think that’s a
viable option?

Michael: OK. It’s a very, very sensitive issue. None of us wants
to sell the asset that we’ve spent so many years investing in.
We want to pass it on the next generation, our children, and
it’s very difficult when somebody comes along and says "You
own this thing therefore you can afford your own care", so I
certainly well understand the aspiration. The dilemma is that
as a society, it is expensive to look after people who have
care needs, and particularly who are elderly. And that expense
doesn’t go away, regardless of who’s going to pay for it. One
way or another as a society we pay for it. We can argue between
ourselves whether it’s you that pays or me that pays, but
basically as a society it’s gonna have to be paid for. If we
don’t pay for it individually by the sale of an asset, then
it’s going to have to be funded communally somewhere within
the tax system and that means either we’re going to have to
increase the amount of tax we pay, and none of us really wants
to do that either, or we’re gonna have to reduce expenditure on
something else. There aren’t any other ways to come up with the
money. The cost of looking after people has to be borne
somewhere. It’s a very sensitive political issue. I struggle
because I don’t know the answer any better than anybody else
does. I think the most important thing is to be realistic about
the fact that it does have to be paid for and as a society we
have to take a decision as to whether we look to people to fund
the cost themselves or whether the state, no, wrong, whether the
taxpayer funds it, or what the balance between those two aspects
is. And if there is a political view on changing that balance,
such that people can retain this one particular asset, well, so
be it, but nevertheless the cost has to come and be borne from
somewhere.

Catherine: And just maybe as a final point, I just wondered if
you’d be happy to tell us about your opinion of the level and
amount of care that’s given in the UK at the moment, whether
you think it’s — care homes are generally good?

Michael: The quality?

Catherine: The quality of care.

Michael: I can answer that question best in a 15 year context.
Legislation governing the care industry became a lot more
effective in the early 1990s. Before that there were some truly
awful examples of care homes. I wouldn’t want to go into the
detail of how bad it got. But society, the government, local
authorities, began to get their act together in the 1990s, and
the standards to which care homes were required to work began
to improve. A sea change came in 2002 with the introduction of
the National Care Standards in what’s called the Care Standards
Act at the time. And since that time, which is now 7 years ago,
all care homes have been governed by the National Standards and
the interpretation of the National Standards. We have a
governing body. It changes its identity and name from time to
time, most recently it’s called the Care Quality Commission and
they’re busy re-interpreting the standards and changing emphasis
in how they are applied. But over the period that the quality
has been influenced or controlled, whatever balance there is in
there, by public bodies, we have seen a steady improvement in
care. There have been and will continue to be examples of truly
awful care homes that have slipped through the monitoring and
control net and there will be awful events that get reported in
the newspaper. As an industry we’re a very easy target. All it
takes is an undercover reporter with a camera in their breast
pocket to go into a home and show somebody not being looked
after properly and the newspapers throw up their hands in
horror and Panorama reports and questions are asked in the
Houses of Parliament. The reality is, I hope and believe the
reality is, that’s a very, very small proportion. The quality
of care that we are able to deliver is undoubtedly influenced
by the amount of money available and, as we were saying earlier
on, local authorities fund up to a particular level and that
means a given level of quality. In my experience, most people
would prefer a higher level of provision. You have to ask
yourself, how is that to be paid for? If everyone is to choose
it and to buy it, then you have an issue of how the state
handles it. If you deal with it privately, then some people
with resources are able to buy it and those without resources
are not. It’s a moral question I have never been able to
answer. All I can tell you is that standards have risen
dramatically in 15 to 20 years that I’ve been involved in the
industry. That has to be a good thing.

Catherine: Thank you very much.

Michael: You’re very welcome.

Catherine: Thank you.
