Interviewer IV: Can you tell us a little bit about yourself?

Sarah: Yeah, of course. My name is Sarah Elvin. I live in
Reading, which is in the south of England. I go to a school
which is for all girls. I am doing my A-levels now so I am
studying English, maths and Spanish for A-level. I really enjoy
playing the guitar and piano, and I aslo sing. Just had my
summer holidays which I really enjoyed. I am really sad to be
back at school. I went to Spain recently, which was really
interesting. I learned about the language. I had to stay with a
Spanish family. Can't really think of anything else to say about
myself.

Interviewer IV: That's great. Do you have any family?

Sarah: Any family? Yes. I live in Reading, as I've said, with my
mum, my dad and my sister. But I don't have any brothers which
is a shame.

Interviewer IV: How old is your sister?

Sarah: My sister Rachel is 15.

Interviewer IV: And do you get along?

Sarah: We do get on quite well, actually. We get on better now
that we are older. When we were about nine and seven we used to
argue a lot because we used to have to share a bedroom. But now
we get on very well.

Interviewer IV: Do you live in a house or a flat?

Sarah: We live in a house on the outskirts of Reading and it’s
got about four bedrooms, it’s kind of medium size quite a big
garden.

Interviewer IV: Do you have any pets?

Sarah: We don’t have any pets. I had a hamster when I was about
seven but since then I’ve proved not very good at looking after
animals so we haven’t had any more since.

Interviewer IV: And can you describe what a typical day is like
for you when you go to school?

Sarah: I have to get up at 6.30 when we’re at school which I
hate and I get the bus with all of my friends to school and
then, now that I’m doing A levels I have lots of frees in my
school day which means I can relax and I often make hot
chocolate or go to the shop and buy unhealthy foods. Lessons at
school are 50 minutes long and during lunch times we tend to, we
have choir practices or we just sleep quite often. Work is
supposed to be done in lunchtimes but it doesn’t happen that
often.

Interviewer IV: And what do you do after school?

Sarah: After school. On a Monday I have a guitar lesson after
school, on Tuesday I have a piano lesson- quite a lot of music
after school. Wednesday I help at the local Brownie pack which
is my community service for the Duke of Edinburgh Award, which
is something that I do outside school. So I go there Wednesdays
‘til from 5.30 until 7 o’clock and I help the children draw
and paint things and make things and we go on pack holidays,
which is really fun. I think I enjoy it more than them.

Interviewer IV: Have you been on one recently?

Sarah: I went on pack holiday in June the theme of which was the
beach which was really good one but it was quite irrelevant
because it was raining in England at the time. Yeah they’re two
nights long actually, which is quite enough to be with 7 to 9
year olds I find.

Interviewer IV: And how long have you been doing that for?

Sarah: I’ve been doing that for about two years now.

Interviewer IV: And you say you play the guitar and the piano?

Sarah: Yeah and I sing as well.

Interviewer IV: Oh yes. Do you have to practice a lot?

Sarah: I’m supposed to practice more than I do. I now have to
pay for my guitar lessons in order to ensure that I practice a
lot and I’m paid back according to how much I practice. So yeah
I should be getting better.

Interviewer IV: So is guitar or piano your favourite instrument?

Sarah: I love playing the piano. I’m better at the piano so
that’s probably why I like it more.

Interviewer IV: And your singing, what kind of music do you
sing?

Sarah: Singing... at the moment I’m doing lots of duets and I’m
also preparing for my grade 8 so that’s lots of classical
things really but I do enjoy those. Lots of different languages
I have to sing in as well, which is very difficult.

Interviewer IV: so, do you do languages at school or have you
done languages at school?

Sarah: Yeah I’ve done I did French for GCSE ‘til I was 16 and
now I’m doing Spanish until the age of 18 and I might carry it
on for university with something else, but I haven’t decided
yet.

Interviewer IV: Do you know what you want to do when you grow
up?

Sarah: Ah that’s really difficult I’ve no idea. I just, I was
supposed to decide that about a couple of months ago but I’m
still working on it. So I think I’ll have a gap year before I
go to university, to postpone making decisions and also I
really want to travel.

Interviewer IV: Is that something that lots of your friends want
to do?

Sarah: I think quite a few of my friends do want to travel. A
few of them want to get straight to university they really like
the idea of going to university, living away from home,
partying, all of the things that university is famous for. I
would love to go but also I really want to see the world so a
couple of my friends I think want to come to Australia with me
or we might go to India, work in an orphanage. This is an idea
that came about this evening. Yeah loads of different ideas. I
just want to go everywhere which is impossible.

Interviewer IV: Have you travelled much before?

Sarah: I’ve been to Europe a lot. We go to Europe in the summer
holidays a lot so I’ve been to France and Spain and Holland and
Belgium and lots of the European countries. I’ve only been
outside of Europe twice, which is, fortunate when I say only.
I’ve been to America once when I was eight and I’ve been to
Australia, and Hong Kong and Singapore because that’s where
flight stopped in the middle. Yeah I love Australia I really
want to go back there. We’ve got family there so I think I can
find an excuse.

Interviewer IV: What is it that you love about Australia?

Sarah: I think it just seems really far away and although it’s
not that different so it’s... I find some places a bit
intimidating just because they’re very different so I find it
difficult to get used to them. But Australia I found I fitted
in but it was, it was still different from home. And I love the
fact that there are exotic creatures in a place where you
wouldn’t expect them which is yeah a bit, very enjoyable. But
also a girl who came to stay with us when I was young who's
related to us lives there and we went to see, we went for her
wedding and so it was lovely to see her again. That’s probably
why I love it because I really like her.

Interviewer IV: You’re not afraid of the snakes and spiders?

Sarah: I am terrified of snakes and spiders but, well the big
ones, but we did in fact see one python on a roof and we were
told not to worry because it had already had its dinner, which
was quite worrying, but also apparently Tasmania has 11 of the
15 most poisonous snakes living there. Which is a horrible
fact, but yeah I didn’t come across too many so it was alright,
but I don’t think I’d be able to live there for any length of
time.

Interviewer IV: When you’ve travelled in Europe do you feel
that’s more like England than Australia was?

Sarah: I think Europe is still very different from England. I
really like going to Europe I think I find it so interesting
going to different countries. Like, like I said I went to Spain
to stay with a Spanish family this summer. And it was really
different to live with them rather than going with my family
who we’re always kind of are just English when we go to Spain,
but I was kind of one of the Spanish people. That was really
really interesting. Also to speak another language. I haven’t
really had any experience of speaking with native speakers
before, so that was, it was much better to immerse myself in
the culture than to just go with my family, though a lot
scarier.

Interviewer IV: What do you think was the biggest difference
between living in Spain and living in England?

Sarah: Ah in Spain they do things ridiculously late. They just,
I found myself wanting to go to bed at about elevn o’clock and
we hadn’t had dinner. And once we out at twenty past one. I
just, I should have been in bed. It was really good fun. I
really liked it that I could sleep for a long time as well.
That was good.

Interviewer IV: And did you find the language, how did you find
the language?

Sarah: The language... To begin with it was very scary I felt
quite isolated to begin with because I just found I couldn’t
understand as much as I’d expected to understand because I have
an English Spanish teacher so I found it hard to understand when
native speakers speak because obviously they speak much faster
and have a different accent, the proper accent. But towards the
end of the week it was it was much better, I could understand a
lot more. Well I could understand everything but my speaking
still needs work, I think.

Interviewer IV: Would you go back?

Sarah: Yeah I definitely would go back. I don’t think I could go
back, I’d like to go for about a week or two weeks, I don’t
think I could go for a month. They told me I could go for a
month but I think that would be a bit much. But no I would love
to go back. They’re such a nice family. I really enjoyed going.

Interviewer IV: So what do you think about living in Reading?

Sarah: Living in Reading? I really enjoy living in Reading.
Everyone’s always very horrible about Reading. It’s not a very
beautiful place, but I like my house. And I’ve got lots of good
friends who live very near me so that’s very lucky. And I really
enjoy my school. It’s very good shopping. And a nice river you
can go for walks along, although I don’t do that that much,
probably should do it more. And, yeah, I just yeah I really
enjoy living here. It’s not a very interesting place but as I
know it well, I like it.

Interviewer IV: So what do you do with your friends when you’re
together?

Sarah: With my friends? Nowadays we tend to just go to one
another's houses, not very interesting. Go to one another’s
houses or go out for dinner or go to a bar or yeah the cinema.
Nothing particularly original. I also really love going to
London so I love going to see musicals in London and things
like that. I always plan to do that with my friends but we
never have enough money.

Interviewer IV: And how to you go to London?

Sarah: i get the train to London, which is about eleven pounds,
which is quite expensive. But I went the other day to go sight
seeing which I’ve actually never done before, which was really
interesting, yeah.

Sarah: And how long does it take?

Interviewer IV: To get to London takes about half an hour on the
train. But then if you want to go somewhere else you have to get
the underground which tends to take longer cos there are quite
often delays.

Interviewer IV: And do you feel that London and Reading are
typical English towns?

Sarah: London is, yes it’s got a great mixture of cultures so
it's, it's not only English, which is what I really like about
it. There are lots and lots of different people there. So I
wouldn’t say it’s only English. But at the same time there are
lots of English things about London which I also love, which is
a bit of a vague answer. But Reading is probably similar but
just smaller really.

Interviewer IV: And when you go to university would you like to
go to somewhere far away or somewhere quite close to home?

Sarah: I haven’t decided about that. I don’t want to go anywhere
too far away. I love the sound of St Andrew’s University which
is actually miles away, it’s in the north of Scotland, I think.
But I haven’t really considered how much time it would take me
to get there. Other universities like Durham and York which are
also pretty far away sound really nice. But when I think of it
realistically it probably would be better to be a bit closer to
home, so need to work that one out.

Interviewer IV: And do you, would you say you’re close to your
family?

Sarah: Yeah I would say I’m close to my family. I talk to them
about most things and yeah I get on well with them. We do drive
each other mad, but maybe that’s an indication that we’re close,
I don’t know.

Interviewer IV: Do you do any sports?

Sarah: I’m not very sporty. I do tennis which is also part of
the Duke of Edinburgh Award, you have to do a sport for that. I
do tennis every week and I’m supposed to go to the gym every
week but that doesn’t always happen. That is...well we go
skiing every year as well which I love, but that’s not
something I do regularly obviously. But I should probably
should do more sport than I do.

Interviewer IV: Where do you go when you go skiing?

Sarah: When we go skiing we normally go to Austria because my
mum is German, well both her parents were German. So she knows
how to speak German and we have relatives who live near Austria
but in Germany so we always see them and it’s just easier for us
really to go to Germany than anywhere, Austria, than anywhere
else. And it’s really beautiful I really love it there we go to
a little village called . Really lovely.

Interviewer IV: And do you feel European or English?

Sarah: I would love to, well I have a boyfriend from Holland who
always tells me that I’m European rather than English because I
think he thinks it’s terrible to be English. But I do feel
quite English but I do feel European as well. I think they’re
kind of, if that’s possible. I do feel very much part of the
Continent but also very much part of the country so kind of
both really. But I think England definitely isa part of Europe.

Interviewer IV: Do you think that’s going to change in any way
in say twenty years time, do you think Europe’s going to be
more a unit?

Sarah: I hope so. I couldn’t, I don’t probably don’t know enough
to predict but I hope that things will get better, everyone will
be friends.

Interviewer IV: Do you know any non-English people here in
Britain?

Sarah: Any non-English people?

Interviewer IV: Yeah, obviously your boyfriend's Dutch.

Sarah: Well yeah my boyfriend’s Dutch. My cousins are French. So
I’ve got a French auntie so they’re bi-lingual as well. They all
go to a school which is for European people so I’ve actually met
quite a quite a lot of European people through them, so I’ve got
some very good friends who are Danish. So I think that’s really
interesting. The Europeans are always a little bit nicer than
the English as well but they’re all really friendly, which
doesn’t...isn’t so much the case when I meet English people for
the first time.

Interviewer IV: I thinks that’s perfect.

