Interviewer V: Ok Sean can you tell me something about yourself?

Sean: I come from originally Liverpool and I’ve moved to
Reading. I moved about a year ago and so I’ve been in Reading a
year. And we kind of moved away from Liverpool to kind of get a
new kind of experience of, you know, different people and we
took a few trips up here and found that the people here are a
lot nicer so it’s good to kind of have a change from you
know... We, the people in Liverpool are nice as well but it’s
good to have a kind of different change so we moved up to
Reading and I’ve made a lot more friends than I did in
Liverpool and a lot better friends as well.

Interviewer V: What do you like about Reading?

Sean: It’s kind of mostly how the people here are really nice. I
don’t really know a lot of the area that well. When I was in
Liverpool I used to kind of cycle round the whole place and try
and kind of know all the short cuts and secret different ways
that you could get to places and kind of off-road ways you
could get from one place to another really quickly. So yeah I
really love cycling and I haven’t really had the time or the
effort to kind of go and do that round here but I plan to. So
gonna do that at some point.

Interviewer V: So you like cycling, what else do you like doing?

Sean: I kind of really love listening to music and there’s
different kinds of, different kinds of music and kind of
learning what different genres sound like and kind of what
instruments go with each genre and trying to tell whether it’s
real instruments or synthesised music. And kind of, I just
really like...at the moment I’m into quite a lot of kind of
rock music so I love the sounds of like distorted guitars and
I’ve now got two guitars in my room and one of them I was
given from a friend. He said borrow it but he hasn’t like asked
for it back and he’s kind of always out and about so at some
point I want to give it him back cos I’ve got my own one now
and it’s kind of... It’s good that I’ve got these when I moved
into the room there’s like these wall clamps so you can just
put the guitar up so it looks really cool. You walk in my room
and there’s like two guitars on the wall. The one that was
given, no the one I bought from a friend who I met in Reading,
he, he give me a massive kind of subsidation I think it’s
called from the price of the guitar, cos ah there was like
chips from it and he’s got a really, really good guitar. So I
spent a lot of time repairing that which was really fun, kind
of going over the chips with black nail varnish and it took
about two weeks but I managed to make it look really good. And
I found a chain and I made that into the guitar strap as well I
kind of screwed it in cos it wouldn’t go on so.

Interviewer V: What kind of chain?

Sean: Ah thick metal chain. Heavy metal. And that’s really good
cos it just looks so cool compared to most people have just
like a leather strap, mine’s like a metal chain. It’s really
cool.

Interviewer V: So the kind of music you, I mean when you say you
like rock, you, you like heavy metal or...

Sean: Not a lot.

Interviewer V: ...powerful...

Sean: Not a lot of really heavy stuff. cos at first I didn’t
know what rock was and I just associated rock with people going
waaahhaa and after a while kind of since when I moved into
Reading, a lot of people here are into rock so after listening
to music I found that rock isn’t all about that. It’s kind of
about the, you know, the lyrics and the kind of distorted
guitars that I really like and you know drums in the background
and stuff. And a lot of people I know play instruments and are
really good at it so, so that’s kind of cool as well.

Interviewer V: And do you go to see bands playing? Have you been
to the Reading rock festival?

Sean: I really wanted to go to that but it’s, you know, really
expensive. I plan to go kind of next time it’s on cos loads of
my friends are getting tickets and we’re gonna kind of set up
tents near each other so that should be pretty cool and I’ve
never been to like a real concert before so that should be
good. Yeah.

Interviewer V: Great. Can you tell me a little bit about
travelling? Do you do you ever go to other places on holidays?

Sean: We...when we were in Liverpool we used to travel a lot to
Wales and we’d kind of have like camping there and it was
really good. I used to love that. But we now don’t have a car
so we kind of are a bit limited to where we can go. So I’ve
become a bit of an internet freak now so I’m always on the
computer and...

Interviewer V: What, what sort of things do you do on the comp-
on the internet?

Sean: Well again I kind of, I found a really cool website an’
you can go on it and then it'll you put in what songs you like
and then it’ll show you kind of what music’s similar to that,
so. And sometimes it comes up with songs that you know and
you're like, I know that song I like it and you can up vote it
or down vote it. And it kind of it’s like a tree so you put
down the seeds of what music you like and then it shows you
similar things and it kind of branches off from there,
dependent on how you vote it, so you can have lots of different
stations and find all new music. Which is really really cool.

Interviewer V: What what’s the name of it?

Sean: It’s Pandora.com. And it’s really good. I really enjoy it.

Interviewer V: And what what else do you do on the internet?

Sean: I kind of go on MSN a lot and go on Facebook and kind of
social websites like that. And I kind of move from one to the
other and it’s like I kind of... I really shouldn’t really do
it but I delete the one that I came from when I go onto the new
one and I’m like I should leave it there cos it’s not like it it
takes up any of my space, like MySpace, but I just kind of
delete it and then go onto a new one. And I found Facebook
really good and there’s like you can have applications in it
where you like...a pirate game I really enjoy the pirate game
on it, it’s really odd, it’s so simple but I really like doing
that. And there was something else I was going to say and I
forgot it. Oh yeah, I really like... Cos what I want for a job
is kind of designing 3-d models for like film and games and
things like that, so I’ve got a few like three-d programmes on
my computer and I love just like doing fiddly things on it and
then once you’ve like made something you can then play about
with it like smash into a wall that falls apart and it’s just
so much fun.

Interviewer V: Is that stuff sort of computer graphic films
you’re thinking of, things like Shrek or...?

Sean: Well yeah, I mean, at first I want I wanted to, going back
really far I used to want to be a scientist and then I wanted to
be a games tester and then I was like no because I found out
that games testers actually just run the same bit of the game
and completely check for like any bugs in that bit of the game,
so it’s really frustrating if you, you play one bit through
loads and loads of times and then you don’t get to know what
the rest of the story is. So after like downloading the trial
version of some 3-d software and playing about with it I
thought that was really cool. And I looked online about it and
it said that you could use it to design games and film elements
like Doctor Who special effects. You could design things like
that and things that couldn’t be physically done with, you
know, real life things. And I really love like special effects
in film so I thought it would be so cool to just be able to
like make an explosion that’s not really there and have like
things flying out or just completely design a room like on
Shrek, or a character or something like that. I thought that
would be so cool. So that’s kind of what I want to go into. So
at home I play about with something and learn new things which
in turn will be able to help me with a job in the future cos
I’ll be able to know how things work. And I’ve been recently
thinking about becoming a teacher but I’m not sure about that
yet because...

Interviewer V: If you became a teacher what would you teach?

Sean: Oh I don’t know. I love like teaching people things and
you know some teachers you're like oh I could do such a better
job than him. And I think yeah, I actually could because I like
show people things sometimes when they get stuck on work and
they're like you like teach it so much better than our actual
teacher. To kind of take something really complicated and then
explain it to someone really simply so they understand it is
quite satisfying. So I was thinking of becoming a teacher but I
don’t know. it’s kind of a clash between those two at the
moment.

Interviewer V: What are you studying at school?

Sean: I’m doing my A-levels. I’m studying, I did study
photography but I changed that to...to...DT.

Interviewer V: Glad you remembered?

Sean: Yeah. I’ve got such a awful, awful memory. So I’m doing
ICT, which I hope will kind of help me with my career and also
there’s a lot of ICT careers and things that you can go down
different avenues, so having that as a kind of core thing means
I can go anywhere within ICT rather than like a BTEC which is
like you have to do games design or do this or do that. Which
is good cos I’ve kind of been a bit unsure about what to do.
Drama and theatre I really, really love. I done it last year
and I’ve re-sit that. because I didn’t do that well in the exam
but I'd done really well in the performance cos I’m a kind of
crazy and active guy, and I got to do that in our, in our
performance which was quite good. And I got a really good mark
for that but I decided to change it and go back and so I could
re-sit it. But hopefully I can do the performance again which
should be good. I’ve done music tech and that was the only
thing that I got a really good mark in. There’s no like GCSE
lead up to that, it’s kind of a completely new thing. It’s
nothing like music, it’s like the technology behind it which
again comes back to ICT. So I got a good mark in that so I kind
of put that on the shelf as it were and after I’ve done this
year I can kind of go back and take that back down again and
take that on to a full A-level. ICT, drama, music tech, DT, I
kind of picked that up to replace photography.

Interviewer V: What’s DT?

Sean: Design and technology. Look, at GCSE I got a really good
mark for that, I got a B. And I made like a computer case which
was really good. It had like neon lights and I didn’t quite
finish it but I took it home and kind of worked on it and then
the teacher was like so how’s that getting on and I was like
it’s really good I’ve finished it, it’s so great. So he was
like oh right so he kind of had to mark me on that. So I think
I managed to get away with a slightly better mark than I would
have had, had I not taken it home, which is good. And then I
had it at home as well and I still have it at home but it’s not
been used as that anymore. It’s kind of like a shelf for like
putting drinks on or reaching something up high on a shelf, so,
ha, that’s kind of funny as well. Yeah so for that I’m kind of
got a lot of work to do and I’ve been telling myself I’m gonna
do it, I’m gonna do it, but it so far not got a lot of it done.
But I’ve caught up a lot the past like three days than I had
like the whole first two months of it. I’ve caught up a lot now
and hopefully by Monday I’ll have most of my work done and I’ve
caught up on that. Hopefully.

Interviewer V: Do you ever go to London or any other places near
Reading?

Sean: I went to London a few weeks ago actually for a, with the,
within the drama to see a performance. An’ it was really cool. I
only found out like midway through the performance that it was
actually the main character was actually a previous James Bond
in the last film. Not James Bond, the bad guy against James
Bond. And I think it’s 'Tomorrow Never Dies'. I only remember
the end scene really well, where they’re in a plane and one
side gets ripped off and obviously computers again I’ll be able
to do that if I get into that kind of job thing. But yeah the
guy’s got like an electric suit and he’s fighting with Pierce
Brosnan and it’s so cool. And I only realised like part way
through that that was the guy and I was like I have so much
respect for that guy, so it was good to see that and...

Interviewer V: Can you remember what the what the play was what
the performance was that you went to see?

Sean: It was called...ah damn. No, but I know that it was it was
about a guy called Jack Horner. The name kind of is like a
subtle hint towards horny because it’s kind of all about him
and how he pretends to be infertile and so in that way he can
get loads of, no impotent, he can get loads of girls in front
of people’s husbands and get away with it and then towards the
end he gets found out. And it’s 'The Country Wife'. Yes I
remembered something. There we go.

Interviewer V: Is that a modern play or is it an old play?

Sean: It’s a...I think it’s a Victorian play but it was kind of
remade with a modern kind of twist to it. It’s hard to explain
but that was basically it. It didn’t have many kind of lighting
effects, it was all to do with the kind of sound effects, and
live and mostly about the actors' performances. And they’d
obviously got in, you know, the guy who’d previously worked on
a James Bond film so he was a really good actor and cos they
got in like really, really good people and it was quite a show
and we were able to make a lot of notes about that which I’ll
be able to use in my drama exam when that comes to that.

Interviewer V: Can you tell me something about your family?

Sean: I live with my mum and sister. I don’t really talk to them
that much. I don’t know why, I just kind of don’t. My sister and
me we always have like a bit of a squabble and an argument.
She’s nine and we kind of have like a brother sister
relationship so we kind of argue a lot and it’s...but in like a
humorous way, because I’m really, really childish and because
she’s younger as well we kind of have really silly squabbles.
And my mum’s hard of hearing so she doesn’t know what the
squabbles are about if they’re childish or if they’re being if
we’re being silly and playing about or not, so she just comes
in and I obviously take the blame cos I’m older. So, so it
always ends up being my fault and I’m like no it wasn’t me. And
yeah we kind of blame each other but it’s all kind of for a bit
of a laugh.

Interviewer V: And are you planning to go to university?

Sean: Yes. I’m kind of hoping I get better results for my
A-level than I did last year. Cos last year I spent a lot of
the time socialising cos I was like new to Reading and kind of
meeting new people as well, I spent a lot of that year
socialising. And I kind of semi regret it cos I met so many
really, really good friends and a lot of them live quite close
to me. And one person lives just up the road so kind of we can
be on MSN and we say yeah come over and we’ll have a play on
the computer or something or watch a film and then I can just
nip up the road. It’s about nine houses along so it’s like a
two-minute walk. Sorry what was the question?

Interviewer V: Are you going to go to university?

Sean: Haha got completely off track. Yeah so this year I’m
trying to get more work done and we’ve been in school about
two, three months now but like the past two weeks have been
like yeah I’m promising myself that I’m really, really gonna
work this week. And last week I didn’t but this week I have
started picking up the pace. So, so yeah hopefully if I get
really good results then yeah I’d like to go to university. I
done last year ICT and it’s really good because I only have to
re-do half the course so the others are like working really
hard and I’m just like yeah I just have to do a little bit so
I’m like working half as hard as them. But when it comes
to...there’s another unit that’s gonna come in called the
pre-release and I haven’t been able to work on that cos we only
get it part way through the course and I have to re-sit that as
well. So as soon as that comes I’m gonna be I have to like ok
I’m buckling doing all this now. But yeah it’s a lot easier
for me. I’ve got like two or three times the amount of work as
everyone else cos I’ve had an extra year to work on it. But
yeah, I’m hoping to go to university yeah.

Interviewer V: I wish you good luck.

Sean: Thanks.

Interviewer V: I hope you’re successful.
