Valerie: So what is government policy with regard to the
traveller community?

Martin: Well, the policy towards the traveller community, I have
to say is actually quite positive, you know, and that's because
of 25 years of campaigning and lobbying made the government now
acknowledge that travellers do have a distinct cultural identity
and the assimilation approach is not longer valid, ok. The
government also acknowledge that travellers are one of the most
marginalised groups in society and they do need special
attention if that's the terminology I can use. So, the policies
which have been developed around accommodation and education and
healthcare and employment are actually very very positive,
they're very good policies. But the issue is in the
implementations, those policies are not being fully
implemented. You know, there's kind of an ad hoc, haphazard
approach to policy implementation, so that's where the
challenge is now and in fact that's where the challenge has
been for the last 10 to 15 years, that we have done the
analysis, we have teased out the issues, we have developed a
policy framework, but those policies remain to be implemented,
and that's where the challenge is and still has been as I said
for the last 10 or 15 years.

Valerie: So you just mentioned about the accommodation, health,
education, so in a way, it's kind of mingling with the society
in a way, so what is Irish society's view toward the traveller
community?

Martin: I would say one of the racism, one of racism, that's to
be quite frank with you, one has to acknowledge that racism is
a huge issue in this society, and it permeates every aspect of
traveller's lives, you know, from the cradle to the grave, in
terms of accessing services, healthcare, education and
employment, public houses, public transport, it's almost a
daily experience for many travellers, many travellers have to
navigate every single day around the issue of racism, to access
a service and so forth. So I would say racism is still a big
problem, but what you also have then is areas where, you know,
travellers are living in certain areas, there's kind of a
general indifference towards travellers, you know. And then you
could argue there's a general indifference from travellers
toward settled people, where that is not any issue at all, they
just live their lives. So that is a huge issue in that respect.
But the point I'm making here is an overall collective terms
that, you know, racism is still a problem, both at the
individual level and at the institutional level, and it's not
just Pavee Point or indeed other traveller organisations are
say this, we have other expert bodies come out and say the very
same thing. For example, we have the Irish Human Rights
Commission say that racism is a big problem and that travellers
are one of the groups which are victims of that. We have the
Equality Authority said, we've also had the UN Human Rights
Bodies, like CERD, the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, when they published their
concluding observations on Ireland in the summer of 2005, they
made the very same point that racism towards travellers and
other ethnic minorities is a problem and it needs to be
addressed urgently. We have had the Council of Europe Human
Rights Commissioner Thomas Hammarberg in his report in 2008
last year made the very same argument you know that racism is a
problem both at the individual level and at the institutional
level and the government needs to take urgent action to address
it. So, I think it's important to make that point that it's not
just travellers or traveller organisations or indeed other
organisations representing other ethnic minorities, we have had
independent, credible bodies both domestically and
internationally make the very same point, racism is a problem.

Valerie: Right. So it sounds like it's a very top-down policy,
you know, government is providing the policy there which are
very positive like you said earlier, but it sounds like
bottom-up, the normal Joe Soap, you know, the normal Irish
citizens, they're not integrating or, you know, mingling, if I
can use that word, with the community, so what can be done
other than you probably promoting, you know, the community to
the Irish society, what else can be done you think?

Martin: Well in terms of the policies, the policies, to be fair
now to the government haven't been developed from the top-down
to be fair, they're actually developing from bottom up because
traveller organisations have been actively involved in working
with State agencies in developing these policies, and that's
why I said that the policy framework is actually there, and the
policies are actually quite positive, and there was, you know,
with some limitations, but overall there was partnership, there
was consultation, there was dialogue, there was genuine
engagement, you know, but it's like any negotiating process,
you compromise a little, you know, to get a little, you must
give a little, ok that's human nature, that's the way of the
world. But we have actually produced good policy framework, the
problem is implementation. As I said earlier on, that now and
has been the challenge for the last 10 or 15 years for Pavee
Point and other traveller organisations is to re-double our
efforts to convince the government to move much quickly in
implementing these policies. But I think your question is
valid, you know, that in terms of the relationship between
travellers and settled people, you need the policies, you also
need the legislation and the education, you know, in terms of
creating a much more harmonious relationship between the two
communities, and we're all for that. You know, whether that's
information campaign, whether it's cultural days or any other
event that's designed to encourage people to interact, we would
support that and always have supported, you know, more
integration and interaction between the two communities. But at
the end of the day, what's needed in our view is the legislation
because, you know, you can't in some respect you probably won't
educate the prejudice and the racism out of people, you know,
not always. But you can legislate their behaviour towards you,
you know. So people might have the thoughts, you know, the
stereotypes and the prejudice towards travellers and other
groups. But if we have strong effective anti-discrimination
legislation that prohibits discrimination, well then you can
influence their behaviour, in other words, they won't be
allowed to discriminate, and if they do, then sanctions can be
imposed on them through our equality infrastructure. So we
take, you know, education and you know that's one element of
the strategy, but legislation is also important because at the
end of the day as a traveller man, I don't want to be dependent
on the public servant or somebody offering a service to have a
good attitude towards me before I get a service. I should have
a service as a right, as a traveller and as a citizen of this
State, it's my right to have a service. And the right to that
service should not be contingent on that person providing the
service that he or she has a good attitude towards me. If they
do, well and done. But if they have a negative attitude towards
me, that's where the legislation kicks in because the
legislation will prohibit discriminatory behaviour. So the
person providing the service still might have the ingrained
prejudice, the ingrained stereotype of travellers, but the
legislation creates a climate whereby it's wrong, it's immoral
and it's illegal to discriminate. And if you do, penalties and
sanctions would be brought to bear on you.

Valerie: At the moment that legislation is not there yet, is it?

Martin: It is. We have the Equal Status Act of 2000 - 2004,
which outlaws discrimination in terms of access to goods,
services and facilities. We also have the Employment Equality
Act. But in terms of the Equal Status Act, there's some
limitations now that one is the Equality Authority's budget was
cut by nearly half. So in terms of the implementation of that
Act, it's really, you know, serious question has to be asked
now, you know. how realistic is it that that legislation would
be fully implemented because after their budget being cut by
almost half. But also from a traveller's perspective, the
legislation was amended in 2003 to take away jurisdiction
around license premises, pubs and discos. So in other words,
any traveller who experiences discrimination now at the hands
of a publican have to go to the District Court to get
re-address as where this body have full jurisdiction, the
Equality Authority have full jurisdiction over licensed
premises until 2003. But because travellers were beginning to
win a significant number of cases against licensed premises,
the government at the behest of the powerful lobby that is VHI,
not the VHI, the Irish Victims Federation of Ireland and they
changed the legislation to appease that powerful lobby. So now
we have a cumbersome and totally ineffective mechanism to seek
redress and that is the District Court.

Valerie:

Right. So what are the common misunderstandings of the traveller
community from the settled community?

Martin: Well, there's lots of them, I mean, actually I think
there're more than misunderstandings and misconceptions, I
think it's just downright stereotyping and prejudice. To put it
quite simply, there're a number of views on travellers, and, you
know, neither of them, you could say that none of them are
correct or there's an element of truth in them all. You know,
travellers at one extreme are regarded as some sort of exotic,
romantic, mystique people, you know, there is that kind of
romantic view of us. That's one extreme. The other extreme is
that we're all cheats, criminals, untrustworthy, you know. So
that's, just to put it simply, you know, they're both extremes
of the spectrum. And I suppose to put it in much simpler terms
the other extreme is that, you know, if travellers are poor, we
are too lazy to work; if we are rich, we are thieves. So, again
you're caught between two extremes, you know. And that's what
you have to deal with, that's what you have to contend with,
you know.

Valerie: How do you feel about that?

Martin: Well, I think, you know, I don't get desponded or I
don't get disillusioned, you just have to fight on. I mean,
sometimes it can be a little bit difficult to muscle up the
energy and the enthusiasm and, you know, you get days like
that, everybody gets days like that, but you have to find that
energy and you have to re-discover that enthusiasm, cause
otherwise, it would just get on top of you, it would just
destroy you. And it's too easy to become desponded and it's too
easy to become bitter, and both are, how would you say,
counterproductive. So you have to press ahead and you have to
keep on fighting and not give up. There're still lots of
challenges, there's no doubt about that. And I don't want to
give the impression that there hasn't been any progress, there
has been, there has been some progress, very positive
developments. You know, but there's a lot remains to be done,
and that's what we're about now at this juncture is going that
extra mile to make sure that we get our full rights and full
entitlements. So I mean, I just want people to know and
understand that we have had some very very positive
developments and achievements and it's about building on those,
you know. Like I'm realistic, travellers are realistic, you
know, this is gonna be tough, extremely tough, and we know
there's gonna be setbacks, and we expect that. So we're well
aware of it. That's what we have to deal with.

Valerie: And you mentioned about some events that you're
involving to bring awareness to the society and what are the
events?

Martin: We have a what's called Traveller Focus Week, which
takes place each December. Now it has taken place in the last 3
years, I think it is, we're hoping that it will take place this
year again in December, December 3rd until December 10th. But
that depends very much on whether the funding is available or
not. I have to say that the Department of Justice have been
very good to us. They have funded Traveller Focus Week for the
last number of years. So if they have the resources to fund us
this year again, you know, that would be great. But basically
it consists of a week of different types of events, like
launches of different types of publications, workshops,
seminars, traveller concerts, you know, different types of
events, just to highlight, you know, the existence of
travellers on the island of Ireland and also of our very
valuable contribution that we do make to Irish society. And
it's also about, you know, trying to break down the barriers
and set on and promote mutual understanding and respect for
each other's identities and cultures without one trying to
suppress or dominate the other. So that's what Traveller Focus
Week is about. Traveller Focus Week is not an event or it's not
a series of events that's kind of in your face, you know. It's
not like the legislation or the policy. These events can be,
and are fun, they are enjoyable, and they bring the two
communities together. So we acknowledge not everything has to
be, you know, around policy or has to be around legislation,
these are very important areas of course, but just information,
education, cultural days also have a role to play.

Valerie: Right. And earlier you mentioned about your
grandmother. She has 40-something grandchildren?

Martin: Well, she passed away there about 4 years ago. She was
90 years old and she has actually 5 sons and 2 daughters and as
a result of that then she has about 30 maybe 32 grandchildren
and about 20 great grandchildren and they all live in the same
vicinity, the same area.

Valerie: And do you celebrate Christmas?

Martin: Sorry?

Valerie: Do you celebrate Christmas?

Martin: Oh yeah.

Valerie: So it must be a huge Christmas party.

Martin:

Well yeah, it is yeah, on the sites, yeah, it is one good
atmosphere.

Valerie:
Right. And you mentioned about like, you know, something of the
events like weddings or funerals, you know, you mentioned that
the difference is in the sheer size.

Martin: Well, I think it's in the size, I think it's also maybe,
how would you describe it, they're large, they're colourful,
they generate a lot of fun, a lot of craic, you know,
flamboyant maybe is the word, you know.

Valerie: Could you maybe describe your wedding to us?

Martin:
Well, quite often, how would I best describe this, match-making
was a huge part of our culture up until few years ago, ok,
where young couples were matched off by an elder, you know,
within the community, could be a grandparent or an aunt or
whatever an uncle. But that has changed now dramatically. It's
now a case of the young couple themselves deciding, you know,
for example, it is generally the young lad who approach now the
parents of the young girl and ask for her hand in marriage.
Before, there was always you know, days gone by, there was an
intermediary, an intermediary that could be as I said a
grandmother or an uncle or an aunt whatever the case might be.
But there's no longer now intermediary that it's direct
approach, if I could use that sort of terminology. So the young
lad, and it is always the young lad, who will approach the
parents of the young girl and ask for her hand in marriage.
That's the practice now. And there's very little opportunity
for what you might describe as kind of courtship, you know,
certainly not on their own. If they go to the cinema or
whatever, they're chaperoned, you know, the girl's always
chaperoned by an elder sister or an elder brother, so very
close monitoring going on, you know. So you could argue that,
you know, there's still a lot of entrenched morals around
sexuality and the control of sexuality I suppose in many
respects, I think that too is something that I think would
change, you know, in the years ahead just like the match-making
has changed and other aspects, other customs have changed, I
think this will change too overtime. But in terms of the
wedding, see, there are some issues within the community which
I would describe as oppressive as well. And to the outsider,
you know, might seem like well that's great, you know, really
looks it's flamboyant, it's extravagant, you know. Take a
wedding for example, you know, with the horse and the carriage
and the huge big wedding dress and all the rest of it, but
there's a lot of expense involved, a lot of expense. And
parents, you know, go to great length to put on a bit of a show
if you like. And it's like the old saying, you know, keeping up
with the Joneses and some of these families get into financial
hardship for years to come. And that's because there's internal
pressure within the community, there's an expectation that
you'll have a large, flamboyant, no expenses spared wedding.
And as I said, I think that can be quite oppressive for
families who are unemployed or might be self-employed, you
know, but don't generate sufficient income. And they quite
often get a loan of money from the banks and what have you. So
these are the types of things that we need to seriously look at
within our own community that there're practices which you might
generously describe as a custom or as a part of your culture but
can be restrictive, can be oppressive. So there are some
traditions as there're in every culture, you know, like female
genital mutilation, so people would describe that as part of
their, you know, part of their tradition and their culture, but
in my opinion, it's a violation of a woman's right of women's
right. So there are practices in our community which I think
are infringing women's rights, on gay travellers' rights and on
children's rights, you know, who are taken out of school very
early at 12 and who are basically given adult responsibilities
at a very early age, you know. And they're really not getting
the time to develop themselves, you know, and have their own
growth and explore the world and make sense of it and all the
rest of it. So, it's only the last 8 / 9 years that that level
of confidence has grown within the community, that we're able
to say, look it, let's hold on here for a second, let's take
time out and reflect, you know, on what's happening within the
community because there's some things which are just not right
and we need to take some responsibility for that. So our
struggle has evolved now to the stage whereby it's looking at
what's happening to the community, you know, in terms of
oppression and persecution and poor living conditions and
little access to education or unemployment prospects and the
rest of it. So we're looking at what's happening to the
community, but we're also looking at what's happening within
the community. And some issues we might have some control over,
you know, like feuding, like domestic violence, like how we
perceive and treat travellers who are gay or travellers who
have a disability, let it be physical or intellectual
disability. So there're some practices which over the years had
become so commonplace that they end up being described as
customs, rituals and part of one's identity or culture. And
that's questionable. It may or may not be, but it still doesn't
take away from the fact that these can be oppressive practices
and does infringe on other people's rights within our
community.

Valerie: And that leads to my next question, I don't know if
it's a valid question, but I heard of this 'The King of
Travellers'?

Martin: It's a myth that's perpetuated by the media. There is no
king. Again, it's just one way of romanticising travellers and
in particular romanticising traveller bare-knuckle fighting,
which is something that is barbaric and it needs to be
eliminated, needs to be discontinued. But the media, in
particular the tabloid media, you know, their headlines that
say King of the Travellers, and they're just perpetuating a
myth. In fact, they started that myth and they've continued to
perpetuate that myth. It doesn't exist, it's folklore, it's
legend, there's no King of the Travellers, you know. There was
a traveller years ago and his nickname was King, just nicknames
is very commonplace among travellers. Like my father would be
called Horse Tom, you know, because he's a big man. Mine is
Copper. So nicknames are huge within the traveller community.
There was a traveller 40 year ago, I think his name was Larry,
no sorry, Lawrence, Lawrence Board and his nickname was King
and I think it might just originate from that. But it was a
nickname, just given to him for no particular, like there's no
title involved, it wasn't as a result of bare-knuckle fighting
or whatever. So it's a myth and it just sounds good for the
media and people reading the tabloid press, you know.

Valerie: What are travellers famous for? I know they're famous
for quite a few things, like the trades and crafts and maybe
music.

Martin: I think music is a big one, and again that hasn't been
fully acknowledged or appreciated by society. Travellers have
made a huge contribution to Irish music and in particular
traditional music over last 40 / 50 years. And in fact, some
academics, to be fair to them, who suggest that when Irish
traditional music was going through a decline in the 20's and
30's, it was actually travellers who kept them, they took up
the mantle, they kept the torch alight as it were when things
then started to change in the 50's and 60's when people began
to take a new found interest in Irish traditional music,
travellers handed back over the torch to the settled community.
This is what some academics would have us believe and I think
that is the case, the travellers have made a huge and profound
contribution to Irish and traditional music, you know. People
like Maggie Barry, you know, the Pecker Dunne, the Dunne family
from Limerick itself, the Fureys, Paddy Keenin, I mean these are
all famous and infamous musicians who have made a huge huge
contribution. So yeah I think also in sports and you know,
travellers have done well they have represented the country in
the art of boxing in the Olympics, you know. I suppose the most
famous singer we have at the moment now would be Shayne Ward,
you know. So then I think, you know, without travellers, I
think many of the horse fairs wouldn't exist. I mean we've a
number of horse fairs now like in Ballinasloe and the Puck
Fair. And many people would say and rightly so, you know, if it
weren't for the traveller community, these fairs would've ended
years and years and years ago. It is the travellers, just by
the sheer numbers and by the sheer enthusiasm and their love of
horses are keeping these fairs viable. Like Ballinasloe would've
ended a long time ago if it weren't for the travellers. I'm not
just saying that, other people have actually said that. So in
terms of animal and animal care, you know, that enthusiasm for
horse welfare have kept these fairs viable.

Valerie: It brings tourism anyway. When is this horse fair in
Ballinasloe?

Martin: It's the first week in October and Killorglin, which is
better known as the Puck Fair, is I think it's this week or
next week.

Valerie: In August?

Martin: That's in August, yeah.

Valerie: Right. Great. Thanks very much, Martin.

Martin: No problem.

