Micheal: Hello, my name is Micheal and this is my twin, Odhran.
We are twins living in Tipperary in the middle of Ireland. We
are 33 years of age, born on the 15th of February, 1976. This
is just a quick profile, just to give a bit of information
about ourselves. I work currently as a Civil Servant for the
Revenue of Commissioners in Nenagh. I work in a Call Centre
dealing with all employer queries, so I'm very busy all day
answering phones. And as a pastime, I like doing any type of
sport whatsoever, kayaking, jogging, watching sport in
television whatever goes. I'm also involved in the local
theatrical society in Nenagh which is the Nenagh Players, and I
work backstage as the Stage Manager for that crowd and I'm
involved there for 4 years. I should let my twin now speak a
bit.

Odhran: Hello, my name is Odhran as me twin Micheal has told ya.
I'm also born on 15th of February, 1976 and grew up in the
middle of Ireland in County Tipperary. I work in a glass
factory here in Nenagh. It's a local glass factory in operation
for nearly 40 years. And we bring in glass from England and
Spain and we cut it down to size and we make industrial units,
make windows for houses and big warehouses and for car
showrooms and we also do curved glass and basically anything
you can do with glass. And I'm working there now for 15 years.
And for interest I also do kayaking, so is with Micheal, and I
help him backstage. And I have a son, 9 years of age, called
Cian, big into soccer, everything is Liverpool, crazy guy. So
that gets me into soccer as well, gets me out, gets me active.
And I love watching the rugby. And I was in Italy there last
March with 100 went over playing rugby. And I just like all
sorts of sports, watch hurling in television and all that.

Valerie: Right. At some stage, Ireland has the highest twin
birth rate in the world. How do you feel about being one of
them?

Micheal: First, that's the first I heard of it. So, I have no
grievance, or something like that.

Odhran: I tell you, yeah, I think you said before it was 50%, is
the highest birth rate of twins. And I think it was on the news
a while back that Galway has the highest birth, the west side
of Ireland. And there's loads of twins over there, and they're
very identical.

Micheal: We must go visit them someday.

Odhran: Go see them. But we have no cousins as such that are
twins. Twins kind of skipped a generation, whereas my parents,
none of their family, brothers, sisters are twins. But their
parents would have some sort of twins. And they normally say it
skips a generation. So like my son in the future if he has
children they could be twins. But, no in Nenagh itself from
where we're from, we might know 5 or 6 sets of twins in around
the area, out the country side or in the local 20 / 30 miles
radius of our town. We know 5 or 6 different sets of twins.

Valerie: And what do you like about being a twin?

Odhran: It's good knowing you've a good friend to rely on, I
suppose. Someone that'll always be there for you. And, you go
through the good times and bad times together and you'd have, I
won't say a shoulder to cry on, but it's good to have someone
there to talk to.

Micheal: Everyone has a best friend outside of some place like,
whether it'd be a brother, a sister or someone that you're
dating or a friend you went to school with. But with a twin, it
is my brother, it is my best friend, someone I went to school
with, and we've always been there for each other. So, it's very
hard to explain because we've always been twins. So, it's not as
if something different happened to us that we suddenly became
twins. So, it's just always been there, it's always been
natural. It's just something we've always appreciated.

Valerie: Right. And you know like from watching movies they
always talk about this telepathy. Does it happen to you, like
say if Micheal gets hurt and Odhran would feel it?

Odhran: No, I've never felt that. I've seen him get hurt a
couple of times and I know he's seen me hurt a couple of times,
and we just laugh when each other get hurt. So.

Micheal: But we don't get hurt seriously like.

Odhran: We don't laugh at each other, we laugh with each other.

Micheal: Very important. Years ago when you grew up as a child,
you grew up together like you're in the same house together,
you go to the same primary school together, you sit beside each
other at the same class. And there is some bit of telepathy
there years and years ago, there was a little bit. But now like
since then once you go to secondary school, you start hanging
around with, you got more friends, you start socialising with
different people. We both went off and got different jobs,
thank God!

Odhran: Different houses. Obviously you're gonna be apart for
sometimes, a week at a time, not let alone 3 or 4 hours.

Micheal: So you don't have the telepathy if you're with someone
that you're with him 24-7. It's like some couples when they're
married, they just know when each other is upset or hurt they
just know. You just grow a bond.

Valerie: Right. And is there anything you don't like about being
a twin?

Odhran: Well as we were saying earlier on, we don't know, we've
always been a twin. We don't know what it's like to be a
singleton. So we've no idea.

Valerie: You said you were in the same class and, you know, how
do people describe you? Like your classmates, do they treat you
differently?

Odhran: It's so long ago and the way people treated us back then
is just same as they treated everybody else. We were all there
to go in and do the homework and have the fun and have the
craic. Nobody treated us any different if we were twins because
we were twins. And same anywhere we go now, people still treat
us the same.

Valerie: And do you consider yourself look alike?

Odhran: Not any more. I think growing up, people confused us an
awful lot.

Micheal: We used to be, but 9 years ago when Odhran's young lad
was born, we both had tight haircut, both had a smig. We both
looked very alike. I won't tell a story about how I got us
confused twice. But we did look very alike and a lot of people
got confused about us. But now, no, no difference whatsoever.

Valerie: Any funny things happened before like you don't want to
go to school, oh sure you were in the same class.

Odhran: We were in the same class yeah.

Micheal: We were in the same class, and our father taught us in
primary school for 5 years. I must say, right, all through
primary school, because our father taught us, you couldn't
mess.

Odhran: Could not mess any class.

Micheal: Because if you mess, if he didn't get you at school,
he'd get you at home. But because of that, going into secondary
school, we went from a very small school to a large school. So,
we went in and whereas an awful lot of people had other friends
to hook up with and join other friends, we hung out with each
other a lot, and we used our own company to meet other people,
so we were slower to really come out of our shell and to really
move forward and stuff. It's really since we left school, we've
become funnier people, I think, I'd like to think, more
sarcastic. But we've become more our of our shell and we are
more willingly and able to speak to the public and speak to
more people. But when you have someone like a twin, it's an
awful lot easier to go into a large place, like a large school
or if it was a large place of work or anything at all, because
you kind of both know what each other is thinking.

Valerie: Right. And like you mentioned earlier each kid probably
has some, you know, imaginary friend. And being a twin, do you
still have your own imaginary friend?

Odhran: Basically I think people that are bored, they're gonna
have an imaginary friend or like a single child. Whereas in our
family, with my parents there was 5 boys and 1 girl, and say,
our elder bother Colm is 1 year older, then there's us, and my
brother Brian is a year and a half older, so there's 4 of us,
within the 3 year age gap, we could all play together, we
didn't have time for imaginary friends.

Micheal: We were not allowed to get bored.

Odhran: If you ever got bored, you could weed the garden or
clean the dishes, clean out the coal shed, bring in the coal,
mop the floor.

Micheal: I was ironing clothes at the age of 14, I think.

Valerie: It sounds like your parents didn't treat you
differently just because you're a twin.

Odhran: Not because we were twins. I remember one time inside in
class, and the parents more or less gave us the values, not just
us because we are twins but our family, values about appreciate
your family and to work hard and the more you do that get our
values to get out of life. And we were inside the classroom one
time and our business studies teacher asked us Who here gets
pocket money? and everybody put their hands up except for us
and he told us it was wrong, it was a disgrace.

Micheal: that we got no pocket money?

Odhran: We got no pocket money.

Michel: I know we didn't but I can't remember that class.

Odhran: Everybody got pocket money except for us. And he told us
we should go home and demand it. We didn't see what's right
like, there's no need for it. The parents had done so much for
us. Imagine have to rear, not just 1 baby, but 2 exact at the
same time and all the work they had to do, the cost it takes.

Valerie: They're treating you not as a twin but maybe just
somebody who was born at the same time.

Odhran: Yeah, at the moment now, they treat us as like
singletons. They could ring me and say if I want to come over
with my girlfriend and my son for dinner. Another day they
could ring Micheal see if he wants to come over for dinner.

Micheal: They never ring me. You know what this is. Odhran has
his own life now. I have my own life. Odhran has a child as
well, so, not that I'm saying he's tied down, but he always has
to stay around home with Cian, his young boy. Therefore, if
they're doing something and they need Odhran, they might give
him a ring. Me, I'm never home. I'm always gone away. So, it's
usually in advance if they need something done, they give me
prior notice that they want a job done. But if it's a huge job,
they'd ring 2 of us then like.

Valerie: Are there any similarities or differences between 2 of
you? Anything at all?

Micheal: Well, judge for yourself.

Odhran: We don't look alike. Some people think we do look alike.
But there's not many similarities as such. Growing obviously the
parents used to dress us up in the same clothes, maybe it was to
have a laugh at us, I don't know. But we used to wear the same
clothes growing up. Then going to the secondary school when you
had the same uniform as well. And ironically enough we both had
the same car, a Peugeot 106, starting off, we both kind of
bought a house in and around the same time, and we both started
a job in around the same time. There's little similarities but
this is nothing to do with twins. This I reckon is just a way
of life.

Micheal: Yeah.

Valerie: And is it only between 2 of you or with other brothers
as well. Do they buy like the same car?

Odhran: Well it just the way things worked out. It's mainly
between us.

Micheal: Well between our other brothers, they didn't buy the
same car as us, they didn't buy houses at the same time. But in
other families, there are some families they would always buy
the one car the whole time anyway like. That's just the way
things are. It's just the way things worked out like. We got a
good deal on two cars at different times and the both of us
happened to pick the same make or model.

Valerie: So you mentioned earlier Micheal that you're out all
the time, always doing something, out and about.

Micheal: I'm a giver not a taker.

Valerie: What do you mean by that?

Micheal: I like to help people out, do what I can to assist
people. So argument sake, I'm involved in the local drama
society, Nenagh Players. So come September to about end of
April / May, I'm out the whole time involved with the Nenagh
Players and I'm working backstage, building sets, taking plays
on tour. I also have helped backstage at a local kids drama
group, Kids On Stage. I do backstage at local Pantomines,
helped out at the Foroige Club. And it's just all the backstage
work that's involved, building ssts, taking down sets.

Valerie: It's all kind of charity work.

Micheal: It's all charity work.

Odhran: He works for the GAA as well, the local hurling society
and he collects money at the gates.

Micheal: When they're stuck for someone to collect at the gate,
they give me a ring and I step in. And there's a farmer as well
out the road that if ever he has a big job lined up, he gives me
a ring as well and I go out and give him help as well I do. So
I'm with him now about 16 / 17 years. I'm with the GAA about 20
years now. I'm with the local drama society 5 years this year, I
think it is, sorry 4 years this year. Because I was kind of
getting bored, after all that, I got involved in the local
canoe club in Nenagh and we set up a canoe club and I'm the
Training Officer in the club, just getting people out, get them
interested into waters, outdoor activity and just trying to
promote outdoor sports.

Valerie: That's great.

Micheal: That's all charity as well as it is.

Valerie: Right. That's great. You think it's easier or harder to
be a twin than a singleton?

Odhran: I think it just comes naturally. There's no difference.

Micheal: There's no difference. It's just as same as having a
brother that would be older or younger than you like.

Valerie: Great.

Odhran: Just you have lots of friends  cause  everybody salutes
you up town. You wouldn't know who they are. They could be
soluting me thinking I'm Micheal.

Micheal: And I'd be out in the pub as well. And I get enough
people Well well, Bodhran and I'm like Well! Who are they?
People don't know.

Valerie: Right. You just mentioned about the pub. I think the
biggest difference in 2 of you that I know is you are a
pioneer, yeah?

Micheal: Yes, I am. I'm one of the few. I do not drink yeah.

Valerie: Did you never drink?

Micheal: I never drink. When you grow up in Ireland, Catholicism
is beat into you basically. you're kind of told Do not drink at
all. When you do your confirmation which is going from primary
school to secondary school, at about 13, 14 years of age, you
take a pledge that you'll not drink till you're 18. Now some
people don't last that long in Ireland. Others do continue on
and I kept on the pledge and I think it was because I'm
stubborn and I'm headstrong that when people try to get me to
drink, I refused and I just remained stubborn all my life.

Valerie: Right.

Micheal: I'm sure it's a good thing, I don't know.

Odhran: He's very stubborn.

Valerie: And what about yourself Odhran? Did you last that long
until you were 18?

Micheal: In a week!

Odhran: Until I was 18? I was nearly 19 years of age when I had
my first drink. No problem. No regrets.

Micheal: I've no regrets either.

Valerie: Great. Thanks very much guys.

