
Interviewer1: Would you like to introduce yourselves for me.

Viveca: I’m Viveca I’m 13 and I live with my mum and dad. In
Reading.

Megan: I’m Megan I’m 13 I live with my mum and dad and brother.

Interviewer1: Ok. And would you like to tell me a little bit
about what you’re going to be doing this summer?

Viveca: I’m going to go to France and to a little village where
we have a house where we stay for about four weeks.

Megan: Yeah and I’m going to France as well. I’m just there for
two weeks and we might go and visit Viveca in her house.

Interviewer1: Oh so what will you do together when you go and
visit Viveca?

Viveca: Go swimming in the lake nearby. There’s a lake. There’s
a town that we could go shopping in.

Interviewer1: So what else do you do, what do you do when you’re
with your mum and dad when you’re in France at your house?

Viveca: We go and visit castles and stuff and we see like all
these different places around the village we stay in.

Interviewer1: And are you interested in castles?

Viveca: Not really.

Interviewer1: So do you mind going to visit castles with your
mum and dad?

Viveca: Well generally we can go and see a castle but then they
promise me a shopping trip the next day so it's ok.

Interviewer1: And what kind of shopping do you like to do?

Viveca: Shoes and clothes, and that’s about it.

Interviewer1: Megan how about you when you’re on holiday in
France with your mum and dad what will you be doing?

Megan: Well we just stay in our house and laze about and go
swimming and stuff yeah that’s all we do really we don’t really
go out

Interviewer1: And do you get on with your brother?

Megan: Sometimes. He’s sometimes a bit annoying. Like we’ll get
into arguments often but they always sort themselves out.

Interviewer1: What kind of things do you argue with your brother
about?

Megan: Stupid things really. Little things that just annoy me so
I yell at him.

Interviewer1: Yes, yes that sounds very normal.

Interviewer1: So how about when you’re both here in Reading,
what do you like to do in your free time?

Viveca: We go shopping.

Megan: Yeah we go shopping a lot.

Interviewer1: You go shopping a lot?

Megan: To town and cinema and stuff.

Viveca: And we have sleepovers.

Interviewer1: When you have friends over for sleepovers.

Viveca: Yeah

Interviewer1: Yes so what do you do with your friends when they
come?

Viveca: We watch movies and we take videos of each other and
photos.

Megan: And we stuff our faces.

Interviewer1: You eat lots of food?

Megan: Yeah.

Interviewer1: And apart from shopping how do you feel about
Reading as a place to live for girls of your age?

Viveca: I love Reading.

Megan: Yeah same I really like it.

Interviewer1: What do you love about it?

Viveca: Don’t know I’m just really proud of it.

Interviewer1: That’s really nice.

Megan: It’s really like cos it's like a town but it's not like
too dirty like London.

Interviewer1: Yes yeah.

Megan: It’s just got a nice feel about it.

Interviewer1: Mm maybe it feels safe?

Viveca: Yeah.

Interviewer1: Yes yeah.

Viveca: And then in the town centre like there’s the cinema and
on the waterside it’s really pretty.

Megan: There’s like everything cos there’s like restaurants and
shops and the cinema it’s really good.

Interviewer1: Excellent. And so at the moment you’re on holiday
but could you tell me about when you’re at school maybe
describe a typical school day for me? Maybe Viveca if you tell
me your routine and then Megan.

Viveca: Ok. I generally get up about quarter to eight and I get
dressed and then I have breakfast at about eight and I walk to
school at 8.30 and then we have our lessons and I come back
from school at 2.30 and sometimes I have like an extra club or
something after school and that’s about it.

Megan: I get up at seven o’clock. A bit earlier than Viveca. I
get dressed and then have breakfast and well I don’t really do
much in the morning I just kind of finish off homework that I
was meant to do the day before.

Interviewer1: How about after school at the end of the day
what’s your routine?

Megan: Well I normally go straight home, really. I don’t really
hang about and I walk home and maybe watch a bit of telly, eat
something and then sometimes I have friends over.

Viveca: On Wednesdays we do saxophone together.

Megan: Yeah

Interviewer1: Tell me about saxophone.

Viveca: Well, in December we’re about to do our grade three.

Megan: Which is a bit scary because we’ve only been doing it
three terms.

Interviewer1: Gosh yes.

Viveca: Because I’m doing my grade three in my violin and I’ve
been doing that for four years so it’s a bit different.

Megan: Yeah. Same as me on piano I’m on grade three and I've
done it for like four years as well.

Interviewer1: Grade three sounds very good in such a short time.
And you have those lessons together?

Viveca: Yeah

Megan: Yeah

Interviewer1: So is there an advantage to having lessons
together?

Viveca: Yeah I don’t feel as nervous if I’ve got a friend.

Megan: Yeah. Because you can have practice together as well.

Megan: Yeah. It’s better than being on your own.

Interviewer1: Excellent. So that’s something that you do outside
school.

Interviewer1: Tell me something that you enjoy that you do in
school.

Viveca: I like drama in school cos I have a really funny
teacher.

Interviewer1: Why is she funny?

Viveca: He

Interviewer1: He. Why is he funny?

Viveca: Well because he’s got a Welsh accent and he’s always
like, sort of doing imitations of people. Lots of really funny
imitations and stuff. And he’s just really fun to be with.

Interviewer1: Sounds nice. Megan do you have a favourite lesson?

Megan: Well I enjoy geography. Some people, most people find
geography boring but I find it very interesting.

Viveca: Yeah

Interviewer1: Tell me what you find interesting.

Megan: Just stuff like about where why people live where it’s
like why they choose that place to build on and stuff like
that.

Interviewer1: Maybe you have a nice teacher too?

Megan: Yeah I have a very nice teacher. She’s the head of
geography and she’s like really enthusiastic and gets us into
the work.

Viveca: And we have her too.

Interviewer1: You like her too?

Viveca: Yeah

Interviewer1: Yes yeah so how would you describe your school?

Viveca: I like it because it finishes early.

Megan: I think it's good at school because but then it is really
strict and the uniform we’ve got is awful.

Viveca: No but my friend that goes to a different school says we
have a reputation for being told off more for our uniform
infringements than for actually behaving wrong which is a bit
you should get told off for not behaving rather than for having
your shirt untucked really.

Megan: Yeah

Viveca: And we have three lunch breaks which are about half an
hour each, and it can get a bit confusing.

Megan: You have to kind of rush.

Viveca: Yeah

Interviewer1: So you don’t get much free time?

Viveca: Not at school. But then we go home early so it’s ok we
go home about twenty past two.

Megan: Yeah so that kind of makes up the time.

Interviewer1: Yes yeah so maybe not so much time to relax when
you’re at school?

Megan: No

Viveca: it's all work at school.

Megan: Yeah

Interviewer1: So that’s sounds quite tiring

Megan: Yeah but then we get lots of homework as well. I think
that’s kind of why we have we break up really stop school so
early because we’ve got we all do get a lot of homework.

Viveca: I don’t think we get that much homework but

Megan: Yeah different teachers it's different teachers and I
have lots of teachers that give me lots of homework
unfortunately.

Interviewer1: So Megan how long do you spend on homework in an
evening? On average?

Megan: I probably spend about an hour on homework.

Interviewer1: About an hour?

Megan: Yeah.

Interviewer1: Viveca how long do you think you spend on
homework?

Viveca: Well on each piece of homework I spend about 15 minutes
but then every day I spend about 45 minutes because I’ve got
other homework.

Interviewer1: Yeah

Megan: But I tend to do most homework the day before it’s given
in but they said they say that you really should do it the day
you get it.

Viveca: Yeah. I'm just not organised.

Megan: You don’t really get around to it in the end.

Interviewer1: Ok so perhaps you could tell me a little bit about
the kind of music that you listen to cos you say you both play
musical instruments what kind of music do you listen to?

Viveca: Pop mostly. I listen to jazz cos I play the saxophone so
it interests me cos I hope that I can play it sometime but

Megan: Well I listen to a range of music. I don’t really think
you can say oh I like this type of music and I hate this type
of music because there’s I mean I like I like indie a lot but
then there’s other songs like rap songs that I quite like, but

Viveca: But you don't like all of them.

Megan: No I like particular songs so I may not like an artist
but I like a particular song they do.

Interviewer1: Yeah that’s great. And how about as you go through
school and you have to choose, make choices about subjects and
you have to think about your future do you have any thoughts
about your future yet or maybe you feel you’re too young to
know what you might like to do?

Megan: Well I‘d quite like to be an architect.

Viveca: Yeah we have a fantasy that we could have like, a sort
of, partnership where I would turn into a designer and she’s
the architect.

Megan: Property developers together.

Interviewer1: Go into business, a partnership!

Viveca: Yeah

Megan: Yeah

Interviewer1: Yeah sounds wonderful. Sounds like a good idea.
Which one of you do you think has the business mind?

Viveca: Megan

Megan: I hope

Viveca: I think I’m a bit more like in the air sort of head in
the clouds.

Interviewer1: Creative

Megan: Yeah I’m more like we’ve got to do this at this time and
I’m quite a straight person.

Viveca: Yeah

Interviewer1: You have to study for a long time to be an
architect.

Megan: Yeah I know I thought it was going to be really quick but
it’s something like seven years and that kind of

Viveca: I wanted to be a vet before but it’s cos my mum’s friend
is a vet and she had a swimming pool and so I really wanted to
be a vet so I could have a swimming pool.

Viveca: I didn’t really know I don’t really know what to do with
the animals so I don’t really think it’s that viable.

Megan: I think if I was a vet there would be too much blood.

Viveca: Yeah I could be a vet that puts down animals because
that would be easier than like healing them.

Megan: That would be really sad as well.

Interviewer1: Yes I think you need to be very very dedicated to
animals.

Viveca: Yeah

Interviewer1: And it’s also a long time to study to be a vet.

Viveca: I’d get a bit bored.

Megan: Yeah

Megan: You might like be studying to be an architect and half
way through the studying you might get bored and want to do
something else that’s the thing. It’s so much long.. so long
studying

Interviewer1: That wouldn’t be a good idea would it no.

Interviewer1: So do you get paid if you help with the garden?

Viveca: No I just wish I did.

Interviewer1: No but you want to.

Megan: I pick my brother up from school and I get paid for that
which is good.

Viveca: I wish I could but I don’t have a brother to pick up so

Interviewer1: So how much do you get paid for picking your
brother up?

Megan: Five pounds for like one maybe two times

Interviewer1: Gosh that’s very good money!

Megan: Yeah I said to my mum I thought it was a bit too much but
she said it wasn’t that’s how much I would get.

Viveca: I wouldn’t say that I would just like see if I said that
to my mum she would probably like do it to about one pound for
two days.

Megan: My mum's like giving all her money away to me because I
pick my brother up and it's just a bit weird.

Interviewer1: So in what other ways do you help your parents
around the house? What else do you do that they consider to be
helpful?

Viveca: I set the table.

Interviewer1: You set the table yeah. Each day every day?

Viveca: Yeah I do it really like and I do it at lunch and
dinner.

Interviewer1: Mm

Megan: I do that but I cook a lot as well.

Interviewer1: You cook for the family?

Megan: I sometimes cook the dinner. And cook cakes.

Viveca: I wish I could. I made truffles the other day with
Josie.

Interviewer1: Yeah lovely.

Megan: Yeah and but I don’t think I’m as good at things like
ovens cos they scare me a bit.

Interviewer1: Yeah because of the heat yes. What kind of cooking
do you do, Megan?

Megan: I cook like pasta and then a lot of cakes as well and
stuff.

Interviewer1: Lovely. I hope they appreciate that.

Viveca: Yeah they do.

Megan: My mum sits watching telly when I do all the cooking but
that’s normally the other way round. I watch telly and she does
the cooking it’s good to give her a break.

Interviewer1: That sounds very considerate.

