Catherine: Hello.

Tim: Hi there.

Catherine: Please could you introduce yourself and just say a
little bit about what you do for a living?

Tim: Sure. I’m Tim and I’m a web designer. I come from
Portsmouth and I’ve been asked here to talk about some of the
charitable projects and volunteering that I’ve done in the
past.

Catherine: Could you explain a little bit about why you got
involved in doing charity work in the first place? Why you
think it’s important, perhaps?

Tim: Sure. I  s’pose  the first major fundraising for a charity
thing that I did was I cycled the length of the UK so that’s
from a place called Lands End to John O’Groats. So Lands End’s
down in Cornwall, in the South West, and John O’Groats is the
north-east of Scotland. And I  s’pose  I actually just fancied
doing the bike ride originally. It’s just something that I’d
heard about people doing and I’d always wanted to do it and
then I was just sort of talking about it and starting to plan
the trip and people said to me, "Oh, are you going to do that
for charity?" or,  yeah  , I’d actually — that’s obviously
going to be quite an achievement cycling that far – it’s about
1000 miles in total. So I thought, "Well, I could use this to
help somebody". But I didn’t really have any strong feelings
about who I wanted to do it for originally. And then I was just
talking to a friend of mine and she mentioned a particular
charity and it just — it struck a chord and I decided I really
wanted to raise money for that charity.

Catherine: Could you just tell me a bit about that route then in
more detail, so you’re going from Lands End in Cornwall up to
John O’Groats in Scotland?

Tim: Sure. I mean the idea of the route is that it’s basically
the south-western most point of the UK to the most
north-easterly point and obviously the south-west of the UK is
Cornwall and Devon which kind of sticks out to the south-west,
doesn’t it, into the Atlantic. So the first day was through
Cornwall into Devon and then the second day was Devon which is
very hilly. I remember that probably being the hardest day by a
long way actually. And then — so that’s heading  kinda
north-easterly direction and then heading more northerly after
that, coming up to the border between England and Wales and
then following that northerly to the north of England. Remember
staying with my cousin in Wigan round there. So that’s kind of 5
or 6 days into it.

Sabine: Did you go to the Lake District? Did you go up more
hills?

Tim:  Yes. The Lake District, kind of around the edge of the
Lake District so there was one particular big hill when it was
quite late at night and I don’t think I had accommodation
planned for the next night or something but it was OK in the
end. But most of the lakes were avoided because I was taking
the most direct route of course. I think I had 2 weeks off work
at the time and I had to fit the trip into that so in total
actually to reach John O’Groats was 12 days, that’s right.

Catherine: OK, and how did you keep in touch with people then
when you were on this trip?

Tim:  Ah, well, I actually had a mobile blog which is a website
which you use — you can write to from a mobile phone. So
actually at the time I worked for a company that did mobile
phone software so I worked with them to develop some software
that would let me from a mobile phone send in a picture and
some text, and I did this maybe 4 or 5 times a day and that
would be automatically published onto the website in a kind of
online journal. And then all my friends and people from the
charity, and in fact customers of the company I was working for
at the time, were following this and commenting on it and it
started a whole kind of community following my trip.

Catherine: And I know that’s obviously quite a big UK-based
project, but you’ve also done projects in other countries
around the world. I just wondered if you could talk a little
bit about sort of moving up from the slightly smaller-scale
projects to the bigger scale projects? And why you decided
to...

Tim:  Sure. I mean the Lands End-John O’Groats thing was raising
money for a specific charity so it’s a one-off thing that I did
just to raise some money. The bigger trip which you’re
referring to that I did was I did some volunteering for a
charity called Volunteer Africa and the project I did for them
was working in Tanzania helping to build a dispensary which is
a — it’s a medical facility in a rural village. So a completely
different ball game really. It involved going out to Tanzania,
learning some Swahili, living in a village with people who
didn’t know much English, learning to make bricks out of just
sand, cement and water, living in a camp, so living in an
army-style tent, cooking for ourselves, working with the other
volunteers there, getting to know with and working with the
locals. We even got involved with the school, teaching in the
school as well.

Catherine: Did you choose Tanzania or was that sort of the next
project that was coming up, or was there a reason you wanted to
go to Tanzania?

Tim: I’ve — I think I found Volunteer Africa on their website
and they do a number of different projects and the project I
most identified with and felt that I could help out with and
wanted to be involved with just happened to be that one. They
actually do a number of different projects in Tanzania. That’s
a kind of building project. They do building of dispensaries,
and also water projects, so wells and things, and schools as
well. But they also do projects where volunteers go to work in
orphanages and specifically to work in schools as well.

Sabine: Is it mainly for people from the UK going there or is it
a worldwide …?

Tim: No, it’s —  yeah  , it’s a worldwide organisation so there
were a few from the UK but also some from America, a few from
Australia, one from Portugal, a variety really.

Sabine: Mainly English-speaking?

Tim: Most — everyone,  yeah  , everyone was English-speaking but
not necessarily their first language.

Sabine: And the local people? You said they had very little
English so how does it work to communicate with them?

Tim:  Sure. Well, we had a kind of project supervisor who was
from Tanzania but not from the village, so he was someone who
knew enough English to communicate with us to tell us what our
tasks were for the day, so teach us how to make bricks and tell
us what we needed to do, et cetera. And if there was any
important communication to be done with the locals then we
could go through him. But we also had a week of Swahili
language training before we started the project actually whilst
we were in Tanzania. So Swahili is the kind of national language
there but the villagers also spoke their local tribal language
and so not all of them even spoke Swahili which can be a
challenge. But I think with Swahili there’s — you can learn
enough in that time to have a basic conversation when you meet
someone in the street and that’s enough to feel like you’re
part of the community and to get on with them. I think that
worked really well.

Catherine: Were there locals working on the project as well or
was it ...?

Tim: Yes.

Catherine: So everybody, all the volunteers and locals, were
building this dispensary together?

Tim:  Absolutely. That’s a very important question actually. So
we weren’t in any way running the project. The locals were
actually running the project. The — Slightly more complicated,
Volunteer Africa work with actually a local charity called HAPA
and they’re actually based in Singida in Tanzania, which is the
nearest big town to where I was working. And HAPA work with the
villages initially when they’re starting the project to find out
what their actual needs are so it’s the villagers themselves who
will say, "Oh, we need a school" or "We really need a new well".
And they will work with them to work out what they really need.
And then they will appoint a supervisor, so the supervisor
would be employed by HAPA and would come from maybe the town
and he would supervise the whole project. But generally the
rest of the skilled workforce is local from the village or
surrounding areas so the carpenters, all of the other kind of
workers really, the skilled people, would be locals and ideally
they’d be kind of trained to — and get additional training from
working on the project so that they can continue to do so in
the future for — on their own. So the volunteers really, manual
labour and any skills that we happened to have that were
relevant to bring to the project. So it wasn’t one where we
were, "OK, we’re building — we’re builders and we’re  gonna  go
and build a dispensary". We were going to help a skilled
workforce that were locals.

Catherine: So how did you sort of — if language was a bit of a
barrier, how were you interacting with the locals then? Was it
a lot of gesture and... —

Sabine: While you were working.

Catherine: Whilst you were working, you know, could you have fun
with these people whilst you were working?

Tim: Definitely, definitely.  Yeah  , I think fun is a kind of
universal language, isn’t it, really. I think, I mean obviously
having some of Swahili and them having the odd word of English
was helpful but if you’re doing something very practical, it’s
relatively easy for someone to show you how to do it and you to
copy them. And it’s relatively easy to have fun and make a joke
out of something even if you don’t necessarily understand what
you’re doing and there was a great sense of community there. It
was great to meet those people and to work with them.

Catherine: I was just going to ask you that volunteering’s got
this — you know, it’s supposed to be altruistic, isn’t it, and
you just go and you willingly give your time but did you feel
that you benefitted in any way even though you were actually
the one going and giving your time and your help to people?

Tim: Of course,  yeah  . I mean, I think volunteering is — I
think the people who volunteer get as much out of it as the
community that they go to help. So absolutely, I mean, don’t
know where to start really with what you get out of it. I think
sense of perspective in terms of different way people live and
what different people have and just different lifestyles
really. And also just meeting people and the sense of community
and making friends with different people from round the world.

Catherine: Have you got anything else in the pipeline, then,
lined up along — I mean, have you got anything that you would
really like to do along those lines at some point in the
future? Or is it just a matter of if something came along, if
the right project came along you’d be interested in?

Tim: With the Volunteer Africa project I think I just decided to
look into it one day and I looked at the project and I almost
straightaway decided I wanted to do it. I’m pretty sure I’ll do
something along those lines again in the future. I haven’t got a
particular project in mind at the moment. One thing I am quite
open to doing is helping out any charities that I might be able
to identify with in a similar way in my work that I’m doing in
my website design so that’s something I can imagine doing.

Catherine: How would that — What sort of form would that take?

Tim: Basically, doing charity websites.

Catherine: Oh, I see. Sorry. OK. Thank you.

Tim: You’re welcome.
