Catherine: Hello

Tim: Hi there.

Catherine: I just wondered if you could introduce yourself and
just say a little bit about where you’re from in the UK.

Tim: Sure. I’m Tim and I’ve been asked to come and talk about
web design. I’m from Portsmouth which is on the south coast of
the UK. It’s a naval town near some islands, ’bout an hour’s
drive from London.

Catherine: Thank you. And could you — You said you were involved
in web design. Could you say a little bit about how you got
involved in web design and what you do for a living?

Tim: Sure. I s’pose it goes back a long way to my time at
university when I studied computer science. I worked for a web
design company then in one of my summers, worked on some quite
big websites at the time. Then I had quite a few years in my
career of working for some quite big companies doing contract
work. Some of it was web-based, some of it other
programming-type work. And then more recently I decided that I
wanted to start my own company and the thing I really felt that
I wanted to do was web design.

Catherine: And what made you decide to set up your own company
as opposed to going and working for another big company, say,
or having a more hassle-free lifestyle with a bigger company?

Tim: I suppose it’s the power to control everything myself and
to take things in the direction I want to take them in. There’s
lots of reasons for running your own company, I think: more
flexibility, being able to target the type of customers and the
projects that you want to do, but also just the extra sort of
skills and challenges of running a company for me just present
something more challenging and interesting to do.

Catherine: You mentioned there about the challenges of running a
company. Could you talk a little bit about the challenges of
starting a company and perhaps your, — you know, any
difficulties that you encountered when you were doing that?

Tim: Sure. I s’pose the initial thing that’s quite difficult, I
think, for many companies, and it was for me, is actually
choosing a company name. It’s something I found really
difficult. You have to, of course, you have to find a name
that’s not been used before, so when you start a company you
need to register it with Companies House in the UK and they’ve
got a website; you can go on there and check which names have
been used before but probably even more important than that,
you need a — especially with a web design company, you need a
name that’s not been used on the web before, you need a unique
domain name. So it was playing around with names that had not
been taken as limited companies and also the domain name was
free and also I think at the time when I actually crea —
registered my company I wasn’t even sure exactly what it was
going to be. I actually started it for my contracting
originally and then the web design thing came later. So it was
choosing something which could be sort of used going forward.
Other things that are challenging, I s’pose , getting your head
round all the accounting and tax requirements which are somewhat
complicated and I mean, I’ve got an accountant which helps me
with those, that side of things.

Catherine: And what about finding clients to start with? How did
you go about starting out?

Tim: I started out mainly through friends and existing contacts,
so other people I’d worked with before, previous colleagues,
contacting them and seeing if they needed anyone that needed
the type of work that I do and that, things just went from
there really. Pretty much all of my work has been through
referrals from previous clients, or people I have worked with
or known in the past.

Catherine: And what exactly does your company offer clients,
then?

Tim: So, the primary focus is web design, on various levels:
there’s basic, several page websites through to — right through
to e-commerce, online shops. I’ve recently done a website which
was an online jewellery store, for example. Additionally to
that, we offer printing, so business card printing, stationery
such as letterheads and compliments slips. We also do kind of
brochures, that kind of thing as well. So it’s the whole
branding package really.

Catherine: So, how much input do the clients have in your design
process?

Tim: As much as they want. I think it depends on the client.
Some clients will have a very strong idea of what they want,
others don’t really know what they want, they just know they
need something and will need much more guidance. So normally
the first stage of the process is to find out as much as we can
about the client, about their business and what they need. For
example, they may already have a logo and a colour scheme in
which case that will dictate a lot of what we do. If they don’t
have those, then the first thing to start with is the logo and
the colour scheme really, and then we kinda take things from
there. So normally there’ll be a design process where they’re
shown revisions of what we’ve thought of so far, of what we’ve
done so far. And they’ll say what they like about those, we’ll
get into more discussion and we’ll do further revisions as
required. So very open-ended in terms of how much client input,
I would say.

Catherine: So it actually is quite a creative job. You think it
might just be a techie job, but actually there’s quite a large
amount of creative input from you.

Tim: Yes, I’d say more creative than technical. In fact, yeah ,
I mean, if you want a website that’s all about your company
brand, so if your logo’s coming with that and the stationery as
well, then it’s all about creating a whole brand really which is
entirely creative. It’s once that design side is done that then
we do the technical side of actually preparing any work for
print and actually implementing the website.

Catherine: And how has your company grown since you started it?

Tim: Well, I’m still the only full-time employee, but I use a
couple of graphic designers on a freelance basis mainly for the
logo design and the print design, those kinds of sides for it.
One designer I have, in particular, has a whole career
background in graphical design and brand management so she
would be heavily responsible for the logos and the print work.

Catherine: It’s obviously quite a fast moving business and an
area that you’re working in, how do you keep your own skills
and knowledge up to date so that you can give your clients the
best possible product?

Tim: It’s as needed really. I mean, I’m following kind of online
journals and magazines on web design so I’m following kind of
the latest of what’s going on in terms of design trends and
technically as well. But normally I will learn new things or
take on new things based on the needs of the particular
project. So if there’s a new project which — Here’s an example.
Recently I’ve been working on a e-commerce site based on, an
existing one, based on some older software. So that’s some
piece of software which I didn’t know before so obviously I’ve
had to get up to speed on using that. And then that knowledge
can then be used for future clients who happen to use the same
software.

Catherine: And that’s very much on a ‘teach yourself’ basis?

Tim: Absolutely, yes. I think I guess I’m used to doing that
from having contracted for a number of years before so I’ve
already been very much responsible for my own training and kind
of career development for many years really.

Catherine: And so as well as keeping your own knowledge up to
date, what kind of follow-up care and client support do you
give your clients once you’ve launched a website?

Tim: Well, the clients get 20 days kind of evaluation period,
and during that period they can ask any question, any support
request basically or any problem will be fixed. So that’s their
kind of real opportunity to make sure they’re happy with
everything they’ve got. For a simple website with basic content
management –so that means they can edit their own content –
that’s plenty. I mean the solutions we do are very easy to
use and that’s all they need. For an e-commerce website they
might need a bit more helping hand as they go forward. So for
those they typically take out a support contract which would be
— would get them a couple of hours per month of support.

Catherine: I’m also interested – it perhaps might not apply just
yet to you if you’re doing new companies particularly – but with
the way that brands often change names and change their designs
and market themselves, I guess that might mean more work for
you if existing companies are changing as well. Have you come
across that in anything that you’ve read or experienced? Or
something that you might envisage in the future?

Tim:  Yeah , of course, of course companies change and brands
change and companies develop in different directions. For
example, this e-commerce site I was talking about, they — they
actually — it’s actually a shop that has bought a website from
someone else and they’re now actually currently running both
brands alongside each other, so the website’s branded as the
shop, the online store name owned by the real shop name. And
they’ve kind of two logos and two kind of colour identities. So
this is a kind of a temporary measure really that they wanted.
So that does create quite a challenge obviously technically to
make that work. And they — it’s up to them to decide kind of
where they want the brand to go, kind of go long term.

Sabine: And also it all becomes more sophisticated. If I look at
web shops now, and say 5 years ago, or even, well, 10 years ago
there weren’t any web shops I suppose, so how does that come in
your — learning something new every day, or?

Tim: Sure, I mean, I think with anything in information
technology I think that the pace of change is very quick and
that you’re always learning something new. I mean, for example,
an online shop is out of date technically within a couple of
years in terms of things that have moved on since then. So it
is very much, I mean particularly with the e-commerce side, it
is very much an ongoing process to keep them up to date. It
only takes the details of how credit cards are verified, for
example, to change. That’s just a change a credit card company
might make and then there’s potentially more work to do to
update that.

Catherine: So it’s outside influences as much as the client
themselves wanting to change but there’s other factors like
credit card companies.

Tim: Absolutely. Especially with e-commerce, yep .

Sabine: Is there a sort of a certain fashion? If I look at
university websites and how they have changed over the years,
and they always often try to follow the — , or seem to follow
the same trend, now they all look like, I don’t know, like

Catherine: Corporate.

Sabine: Corporate, yes.

Tim:  Yeah .

Sabine: Is there such a thing as a typical of each and every
branch? Or how does that work?

Tim: There are definitely design trends for different styles of
websites, so the university website that you mentioned, I guess
the reason — one reason they might have followed more of a
corporate style is just to get more information over. And just
to look professional as well. I think there’s been a strong
trend in web design towards websites that are very easy to
understand and follow. Obviously it’s very important to be able
to navigate clearly and to get to the information that the user
wants. I think in the early days of web design there was a lot
more designing for design’s sake. So designing because
something looks pretty. And, I mean, it is important that
things look good but it’s more important that the user can get
to the information they want because that’s what the website’s
there for at the end of the day.

Sabine: That’s interesting to know. OK.

Catherine: Definitely. Could you talk a little bit about how
with a — when you run your own company there is a danger I
think that you end up working 24 hours a day so how do you sort
of say to yourself "OK, that’s it for one day. I’ve had enough,
I’m not gonna do any more"? How do you sort of get that balance
in your life?

Tim:  Yeah , I do think that’s a real danger. I’m not working 24
hours a day thankfully at the moment! I thought — I think I
thought when I started, I think I thought I would end up
working more than I have in terms of hours. I — it’s almost
surprised me a bit that actually the hours I work are roughly
based around normal office hours which may seem — yeah , it’s a
surprise in a way. But I mean I do have flexibility. For
example, if I want to take an afternoon off to do something,
I’ll then work, you know, I’ll catch up in the evenings or at
the weekend. So it’s good to have that flexibility but my
default is to work roughly normal office hours. There’s a few
reasons for that. Obviously customers are working those hours
typically and expect me to be available those kind of hours, so
that works well. Secondly, just the routine and I think having
that routine of working roughly normal office hours is probably
the reason I don’t end up working a ridiculous number of extra
hours. I mean, I will — I maybe do a bit more than a normal
office week but not that much more. Work-life balance, I think
in the week I can tend — it tends to get quite intense. When I
am actually working, I’m sat at my computer designing or
programming or speaking to a customer or whatever, and
sometimes I might start at 8 in the morning and then it’s 4
o’clock in the afternoon and I realise that’s the first time
I’ve looked out of the window. So it can be very, very intense,
and I can be very, very focused on what I’m doing. And I think I
know when to stop because if I’ve been working that intensely
until end of the office day, then I kind of have to stop anyway
because you break then.

Catherine: You have to.

Tim:  Yeah .

Sabine: OK, you need to stop.

Catherine: OK, that’s lovely. Thank you very much.

Tim: All right.

Catherine: Thank you.
