Gilly:  My name’s Gilly Botte and we’re sitting in Witley which
is near to Guildford, just south of London in the South East of
England.

Catherine: And we’re obviously in your offices here. Could you
explain what you do for a living?

Gilly:  Yep  . I’m an event organiser and we’re specifically
talking about wedding planning today so I also organise a lot
of weddings.

Catherine: And do you run your own company?

Gilly: I do, I do.

Catherine: Could you explain a little bit about the company and
perhaps why you decided to set up a company and how it’s
developed?

Gilly:  Yep  . The company has been running for about 6 years as
The Great Big Event Company and we were getting involved in a
lot of private events and weddings as part of our services. So
we decided to formalise because of the internet The Great Big
Wedding Company which is part of The Great Big Wed Event
Company.

Catherine: OK. So it was because you were doing a lot of
weddings that you decided to formalise it.

Gilly: Formalise it, yes.

Catherine: OK. And what exactly does planning a wedding involve?

Gilly: Everything! It involves prioritising, meeting with the
clients who are couples of mixed sort of origins and they’ve
come together to decide to get married. So they call in our
services because they need some professional help. Part of that
professional help includes offering advice and service advice as
to how they can best get their wedding day of their dreams. So
that’s — we do everything. We cover catering, marquees, venue,
location searching, destination management, all sorts of
things.

Catherine: So from beginning to end.

Gilly: Really,  yep  .

Catherine: OK. I’m quite interested in the trends that maybe are
involved in weddings, particularly in the UK. Has there been a
move away from the traditional big white wedding?

Gilly: There has,  yeah  . I believe so. The traditional white
wedding probably filtered out about 20-odd years ago, if I’m
really thinking about this. Everything has become much more
accessible obviously and there a lot of creative people out
there advertising their services online so with that people
have opened up their mind and their options as to what they can
do for their wedding day. So,  yeah  .

Catherine: So what kinds of things do people now do instead of
perhaps getting married in Church and having the traditional
wedding breakfast?

Gilly: So a variety of things. So there’ll be things like people
will want to go overseas for their wedding or they may just have
a quick registry office wedding and then there’ll take their
immediate family and friends across to a villa in Portugal and
try and create it into something that’s splendid for them. Or
there is trying to simplify the authentic English wedding which
is a big trend at the moment. So what we mean by that is a
marqueed wedding, so bringing in afternoon teas perhaps, hog
roasts, less of the formal three-course seated wedding
breakfast and more of the sort of going back to basics.  Yeah
.

Catherine: And what do you think has prompted that shift away
from the traditional white wedding?

Gilly:  I think there’s a lot of social impact so part of that
will be mixed couples, broken families, people wanting to sort
of be careful with budget, people wanting to keep everybody
happy, over and above themselves as a couple and then also the
individual couple wanting to be very private about it and keep
it quite exclusive and just to do something that’s really quite
important to them, over and above what is per se perceived to be
a cultural experience at a wedding. So yes, I think it’s social
impact, it’s financial, it’s emotional.

Catherine: Just talking about the emotional side of it then, is
it — do you think there’s quite a lot of pressure on a couple
nowadays to produce something that’s a bit different or a bit
quirky on their wedding day? Is that why they come to you, do
you think?

Gilly: I think that’s part of why they come to us. I think the
social sort of impact is across the world. It’s gone away from
being a community event; it’s much more about — people have
travelled more, people have met more people in their lives,
they want to satisfy a whole heap of reasons to bring these
people together. So their sort of ethos is about everybody
else, whilst also thinking what they would like to do. And I
think — I think there is a little bit on religion here in terms
of their beliefs. They aren’t so focussed on satisfying the sort
of real service and the real union and the joining of them as a
couple. They’re more thinking about a party and celebrating
their love. For whatever reason so it’s become much more of a
party than an actual wedding breakfast to celebrate the sort of
tradition of the ceremony.

Catherine: How do you cope with things like inter-race or
inter-religion marriages? Is there quite a lot of negotiation
that has to be done with weddings like that?

Gilly:  I think the negotiation takes place with the couple
actually. I think they actually are the easier couple to deal
with because they will bring you — bring to the table the
actual facts, you know, my background is this and my husband to
be’s background is that. We want to make sure that we satisfy
and meet in the middle here. So we as a planner know from the
outset what we’re going to be dealing with which makes our job
much more easy actually. It’s all sort of on the table and
up-front and all we can then do is try and get creative with
that but also bear in mind what the two sort of cultures are.

Catherine: You mentioned there about being creative. What kind
of creative input does a wedding planner have? It’s
traditionally perhaps associated with being about the
organisation and the logistics of the day, but do you have some
kind of creative input as well?

Gilly: Yes. I mean, I think we have to — really a good wedding
planner has to be able to offer the full, comprehensive service
or opinion. So they need to be quite well-versed in what they’re
talking about with their clients and if they’re not they need to
be honest and say "I don’t know". I really, you know — be
absolutely frank with their clients. Creatively, yes, creative
on all sorts of areas. So from aesthetics through to budget,
we’ve got to be very creative, how we make things work for
the client.

Catherine: So in terms of the creativity then, is that things
like flowers and catering and presentation of the day
generally?

Gilly:  Presentation. It’s in keeping with those, the bride and
groom or the couple that are getting married. What do they
want? What do they want the feeling to be on that day? So do
they want somebody to come in and sort of think "I’m in India"
or "I’m sitting at the top of a Mount Everest and it’s really
chilly in here" or "it’s the middle of night and the stars are
shining". So then we have to get creative but we have to know
how to get creative for them that’s workable.

Catherine: You also mentioned there briefly about budget
constraints as well. How big an influence does budget have on
the wedding day?

Gilly: I would say it’s the first — pretty much our first topic
of conversation with most couples is: what is the budget? That
once we have that starting point we can then work within it so
I would say it’s pretty much a hundred per cent of what they're
doing because unfortunately marriages aren’t for free. People
can’t do it for free and as soon as they have to outsource a
service or go outside of their family for any service, it’s
going to cost money. So that is very basic answer but budget is
absolutely integral to what we can give them to satisfy what’s
in their head.

Catherine: And I imagine that can be quite difficult sometimes,
if people are slightly unrealistic about what they can, what
they can get for their money.

Gilly: It is, incredibly.  Yeah  . I think it’s, it’s —
‘unrealistic’ is a good word. I would sort of more say it’s
what these people have been thinking about is pretty much all
of their life so when it comes down to it, what they were
thinking about when they were 8 to 12 as particularly girls,
nowadays have tribbled (slip of the tongue) — trebled in cost
so they might have been thinking about, you know, a pink
carriage or a white horse, nowadays that could be up to
thousands of pounds or, you know, thousands of euros. You’re
talking about a lot of money for one element. So where we come
into our own with those people is we sort of try and pull that
back in and show them a sort of alternative that still meets
with their dream wedding and we do it quite successfully, so I
think that’s part of the enjoyment of what we do.

Catherine: And I guess as well it takes a lot of pressure off
the bride and groom as well if they’ve got somebody dedicated
and working on their wedding whilst they’re at work or out and
about?

Gilly:  Absolutely. It’s a trust thing. It’s a big — the biggest
part of our job is trust and they got to know that when they’re
sort of talking about what they want, how much money they’ve
got, those are very personal things that they’re sharing with
us so the trust issue comes in, in terms of they know that
they’re in the right hands, somebody is actually giving them
good opinion and advice. We know if we’re not working with our
partners and we’re put into a situation where we’re working
with other partners or services because that’s who they would
choose to do something with, we need to know that we’re giving
them a professional service all the way down the line and we
are actually focussing on them as a couple and not our own
egos, which is big in this industry.

Catherine: Finally then I was thinking about how the role of the
wedding planner sort of came about and how it’s evolved. I
wondered if you could just talk a little bit about that.

Gilly: Well, call me J Lo!

Catherine: That’s a good answer.

Gilly: I don’t actually give her full credit. I think
potentially again a social — it’s through the media, it’s
social impact. There is a real need for this as a role in terms
of — because of the whole social impact going on and you have
people that are sort of meeting whilst they’re travelling or
they’re meeting in completely 2 different environs and over the
web, over the, you know, the internet. When they get married. We
actually haven’t had a couple that met that way yet, so that’ll
be good experience.

Catherine: That’ll be a good first to look forward to.

Gilly: Yes. So I think — I think the role evolved because there
was a necessity for busy lives, busy people wanting to get
their dream wedding and wanting to feel that they were going to
be serviced and pre given good information on time and within
their budget to satisfy what they want. And I also believe
there’s a huge, huge impact on the family in terms of keeping
people happy by bringing in a professional provider to say
"This wedding planner has suggested 3 options. This is what we
would like as a couple and it’s within our budget" and then
there is no room for discourse.

Catherine: So it’s much more about, as you were saying earlier,
about being part of the wider family rather than just being
about the couple now?

Gilly: Yes, I believe so,  yeah  .

Catherine: That’s lovely. Thank you very much for your time.

Gilly: That’s my pleasure. Thank you.

Catherine: Thank you.
