Felicity: My name’s Felicity Manser and we’re at the University
of Surrey in the translation department.

Catherine: And whereabouts do you live? Do you live near
Guildford?

Felicity: I live in Fernhurst which is a village about half an
hour from Guildford and  ’bout  an hour from London.

Catherine: Is that south?

Felicity: South, yes. So just towards the coast.

Catherine: OK, right. OK.

Catherine: I know that you had your first child in 2008.

Felicity: Yes, that’s right.

Catherine: Yes. I’d like to ask you some questions about being a
working mum and how you juggle your work and home life. Could we
start maybe right at the beginning and maybe could you just tell
us about your maternity leave perhaps, and how that worked out?

Felicity: Yes. Well, it was a great invention, maternity leave.
I started my maternity leave actually quite a long time before
Theo was born. I actually stopped working at the end of June
and he wasn’t born until the end of August so it was lovely,
just preparing, getting ready, meeting my friends and really
relaxing. And then he arrived at the end of August so he was 2
weeks late and then everything kicked off. So,  yeah  that’s
how it works and then my actual maternity leave was a whole
year in the end  cos  at the University you can have an extra 3
months unpaid so it was a really good deal for a whole year away
from work.

Catherine: So you can generally get 9 months off?

Felicity: 9 months in general and then the University offers
another 3 months.

Catherine: OK. And after Theo was born then, did your husband
have some time off as well for paternity leave?

Felicity: all Allegedly he had a couple of weeks, but to be
honest he was checking his email and in touch with work and his
boss. It was great moral support him being there, particularly
in the hospital, but actually he was working from home. And I
think that’s quite expected amongst his group of friends. Most
people don’t seem to admit to taking 2 weeks off work
completely, as if it’s not very macho. So,  yeah  2 weeks but
he was in touch with work.

Catherine: It’s more just a name for calling 2 weeks working
from home.

Felicity:  Yeah  , I think it’s hard for men actually because if
you did take 2 weeks off, it’s not very long actually to bond
with the baby so I think it still says a lot about society,
really, in Britain.

Catherine: How — what was the adjustment like after Theo was
born, then? I mean, obviously, until that — until you’d started
your maternity leave, you were getting up, going to work
everyday, keeping office hours. What was it like after Theo was
born?

Felicity: A complete bombshell, absolutely.  Yeah  , I think for
him as a baby he’s quite energetic and his sleeping was OK at
the beginning. It actually deteriorated, I suppose, in terms of
a pattern. But  yeah  , life is turned upside down. Actually in
a good way in some ways. I think for me certainly meeting
different people through him, and regularly meeting with a
group of other families with the other babies has been a really
nice different experience locally. But I suppose any form of
routine, socialising with friends without babies, gay friends,
particularly male gay friends, lots of different things have
changed relationships I suppose with him. But all for the good
really. I think I wouldn’t have it any other way now, but
certainly my life is completely different and of course Chris’s
is as well, so...

Catherine: So you found that there was a big sort of social
change, then, after having Theo?

Felicity:  Definitely, I think much more sort of narrows life
down in a way in that you — inevitably we see more of our
families than we did before and actually where we live is
pretty much where I grew up so it’s sort of back to home roots,
shall we say, which is lovely for support and feeling, for me, a
sense of home but for Chris obviously, he’s from Wales, so we
take the 3 hours back to Wales to see his family and be with
his family as much as we can as well.

Catherine: Did you always plan to go back to work after — well,
when Theo was old enough or was that necessity really?

Felicity: It’s interesting. I always imagined working. I wasn’t
sure if I’d make a change sooner than I will do. But I think
now that I’m back at work, I actually realise the balance is
very nice for both of us because we pay for quite an expensive
nursery but I think we’re very happy with the time he has there
so yes, I imagined I would make some changes but actually the
only change is working 4 days a week instead of 5, so that’s
how it’s worked out for us.

Catherine: And how many days of that does Theo go to childcare?

Felicity: He goes for 3. He goes for Monday, Thurs Wednesday and
Thursday to the nursery and then on Tuesdays he’s with my mum,
so that’s a really nice balance because she comes to the house
so he can, you know, still be in his jimjams and then doesn’t
have the routine that they have at nursery. Saying that, at
nursery I think he’s learnt a lot about routine that helps us
at home because they make him sleep for a couple of hours at
lunchtime and he’s used to seeing lots of different kinds of
people so that’s really good.

Catherine: You said there about your mum looking after Theo. Do
you think that’s quite a common trend now, that the
grandparents are getting more involved in the childcare of
their grandchildren than they ever used to?

Felicity: I think it’s interesting. Certainly, I suppose because
I’m an older mum, I think it’s different the relationship that
my mother had and has with her mother, in that there were lots
more people around, lots more siblings, lots more aunties and
uncles, whereas because I’m an older mum, I’ve, sort of, got
one grandma and some aunties and uncles but it’s a smaller
network of support. But I think my mum sometimes gets stuck
between caring for the older members of the family and the
younger ones. It’s a different pressure for everybody, I guess.
But I think on the Tuesdays she sees herself as the grandma plus
childminder and then at the weekends, or tomorrow for example
when he’ll go to see them tomorrow, then it’s "nuna", you know,
it’s — that’s what he calls her, "nuna". Then she can spoil him
and muck around and not be so much the carer, if you know what
I mean. It’s like a normal grandma and baby. […]

Catherine: I imagine if your — if the grandma does the full-time
childcare, that relationship is very different because they’re
doing the discipline and the routine and maybe not doing the
spoiling and the treating as much.

Felicity: Absolutely. I think that’s true, and I think that it’s
—  yeah  it’s funny sometimes, for any of us I suppose,
remembering our childhoods and remembering how your mum was to
you when you were a child and then seeing how different they
are with your child. How they’re more lenient or stricter, and
that’s quite bizarre. So —

Catherine: Or frustrating?

Felicity: Or frustrating.  Yeah  , or disappointing. But no, I
think it’s just really nice and I think that, compared to some
people who don’t still have their parents around, it’s just so
nice to be able to say "help" or "  yeah  , let’s all play
together" and that can be lots of fun. Particularly Chris’s dad
who’s, gosh, 76 now, and seeing Chris’s dad on all-fours going
round the sitting room with Theo on his back is just fantastic.
It’s like a different guy, you know, the donkey. And it’s
lovely, just lovely to see him.

Catherine: But you’re right I think that that generation is then
getting caught between their parents who are living longer now
than they ever used to, having very elderly parents themselves,
and, you know, their own kids and grandkids. It’s a lot to cope
with, isn’t it, and look after?

Felicity: I think it’s hard.  Yeah  , absolutely. But then some
— my cousin who’s my age has got 4 children, so I guess some
people do start young and then they have the siblings which
also must help a lot, I think,  cos  you can leave a couple of
kids together to play, can’t you, and they amuse themselves,
but if it’s just the grandparents or you, the parents, then
it’s very intense.

Catherine: It’s all you.  Yeah  ,  yeah  .

Felicity:  Yeah  , pretty much.

Catherine: Do you think then that it helps that you’re very
close in terms of location to your parents? That you’ve got
them that close to you.

Felicity: I think mostly,  yeah  . I think when I first had
Theo, I had problems with mastitis for a long time, I wasn’t
very well, and because I had an emergency Caesarean I
physically didn’t feel like myself. And I still think about it
sometimes. I think it affects your psyche, the way you cope
with things that once might have worried you, you then think
"Actually, it’s not such a big deal". I do. So I think
physically for them to be close at the beginning was wonderful
cos  I could just — My dad also is very good with children, so I
could just call up and say "Hey, help", you know, "I’m tired" or
"Please come and help me" and that was fantastic. Now it’s
different but they would still volunteer to just call by and
have a cup of tea which is really nice.

Catherine: And that’s good for the grandparent-child bonding as
well, isn’t it, I think?

Felicity: Absolutely.

Catherine: So I’m getting the impression then that in Fernhurst
you have quite a strong network of friends, family, people that
you’ve met through maybe antenatal classes and things like that
that are all there together. Is that an accurate description?

Felicity:  Yeah  , absolutely. It’s something we worked at,
certainly, and I think we do know more people now than before
we had Theo. But I very much enjoy just getting up in the
morning and just walking out to the local shops with him and
saying hello to the old people who are out walking their dogs
or something, and we’ve got to know, not a huge amount of
people, but more people than we knew before.

Felicity: Also the NCT, the National Childbirth Trust, is a
really interesting organisation where you can join, you pay for
the courses and then you pretty much vow to be friends with
these people which is lovely because then you’re in it for the
journey together. So…

Catherine: Is that antenatal classes you’re talking about, or?

Felicity: That — There was an antenatal part to it, but then
it’s extended after that to a sort of agreed friendship so
there’s 8 little families who stay in touch and every week
we’ll meet up and it might be a playgroup or it might be just
at someone’s house but it’s evolved into quite a nice meaningful
friendship for all the kids as well.

Catherine: That’s really nice.

Felicity: It is nice.

Catherine: So you’ve got a sort of organised support network
there that you — that’s kind of ready-made for you.

Felicity:  Yeah  ,  yeah  . And it’s nice looking back to those
first antenatal classes together and thinking, "Mmm, I wonder
if we’ll stay in touch?" and we have. Very mixed group of
people. Apart from one couple actually but she was a lot
younger. I think she found us boring because we’d talk about
maybe dull things. […] So  yeah  , in general that is lovely,
and we do, I suppose,  yeah  , just socialise often with those
people. And sometimes the guys will just go out for a drink as
well which is quite nice, without the girls.

Catherine: That’s a really nice thing to do.

Felicity:  Yeah  .

Catherine: Do you know how successful the National Childbirth
Trust is at keeping those groups together? […]

Felicity: I guess it’s early days because it’s still just over a
year, what is it? 15 months, so it’s still probably early days
and I’m sure that already one of the couples is having another
baby and that’s  gonna  change the dynamic, isn’t it, when
you’ve got all the second time experience, but …

Catherine: So it was all first-time mums in that group?

Felicity: It was  yeah  , that’s interesting, I hadn’t thought
of that before.

Catherine: OK.

Felicity: But  yeah  it was, all first-time mums. And dads. Oh
no, no, that’s not true. One of them actually has another child
from a previous relationship, but  yeah  . Actually Charlie
sometimes has come to the meetings as well, the other child.

Catherine: That’s nice.

Felicity: So it is nice. It’s quite inclusive.  Yeah  .

Catherine: OK. And what do you find now that you’re back at work
are the sort of challenges of being a working mum? Do you find
it more difficult, more tiring, having to come and do a full
day’s work and then go home and carry on working, I  s’pose  ?

Felicity: I guess it’s just different. I think at the beginning,
I felt like I might not be able to do it, and that was quite
difficult. My confidence, I think, was down, but actually
coming back I find that I’m much more focused. Time management,
all these classic words, you just have to do the stuff in the
time and then go. And that’s really good. Also for colleagues,
I think. I think it’s dangerous when people just work too long,
get too tired, and then the whole workplace is a bit stressful.
Whereas because now I have to leave on time, there’s no problem
with that. Just go, and that’s how it is. So actually I think
we’re in the swing now. I do actually sometimes think I’d
like to cut back to 3 days a week. I think that balance would
actually be best for us, but for now we’re at 4 days a week.
[…] Well, it’s made me feel that the balance is good. I enjoy
not being mum for a bit, but then I also enjoy — I actually like
it when Theo comes to visit the bookshop as well. It’s nice to
mix that and to have people you work with meeting Theo. And for
him also I think it’s — I think it’s nice for mums to be able to
work if they want to, as difficult as it is sometimes, if the
child’s ill or something. But I think it gives a good balance
to life. I actually really admire full-time mums, I think it’s
probably the hardest thing in the world to do.

Catherine: There’s no let-up.

Felicity: Exactly,  yeah  .

Catherine: And finally, I was just  gonna  ask you about the
trend in the UK for women possibly to have — you know, they’re
getting married and having kids generally later in life now, it
tends to be more in the mid-late 30s than in the 20s as it was
kind of 30-40 years ago, I  s’pose  . Was it quite important
for you to establish your career first or did it just happen
that way, that…?

Felicity:  I guess I wasn’t really broody until I got to
probably 35 and Chris jokes about it because he says that I
would keep saying, "We should have talked about this before we
got married" because I very clearly suddenly did want to have a
baby and I think for him as a guy it didn’t really bother him
either way, for him. So I think I’ve always enjoyed working and
I’ve always enjoyed lots of things about work so I guess it was
just the right time for us.

